<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <title>About</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h1 id="top">About Our Project</h1>
        <div class="navbar" id="aboutNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="#research">Research Question</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="#back">Background</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="#method">Methods</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="#acknowledge">Acknowledgements</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="#source">Sources and Links</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2 id="research">Research Question</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <p>At the beginning of the semester, we set out to explore translation differences
                between a well-known English text and its Japanese counterpart. We settles on
                Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, and asked: how are literary elements translated
                when their main purpose is to convey a sense of whimsy in a document?</p>
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
        <h2>Background</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <h3 id="back"><span class="title">Alice</span> Translations in History </h3>
            <p>Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland was written by Lewis Carroll (a pseudonym created by
                Charles Lutwidge Dodgson) and was originally published in 1865. Carroll published
                three other Alice-related works: Through the Looking Glass and What Alice Found
                There (1871), Alice’s Adventure’s Under Ground (1886), and The Nursery ‘Alice’
                (1890). </p>
            <p>The first Japanese translation of one of Carroll’s works was of Through the Looking
                Glass published in 1899. Since this initial translation, there have been 1,271
                editions of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and 321 editions of Through the Looking
                Glass translated into Japanese over the course of 119 years (it should be noted that
                the only other language with translations in the thousands is Spanish with 1,223
                editions; the third most popular language, German, has less than half of this)
                (Lindseth 741). Titles often differ across translations, but the most commonly used
                title is Fushigi no Kuni no Arisu (「不思議の国のアリス」). </p>
            <p>Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland continues to be translated, adapted, and used as
                inspiration for new works throughout Japan today. There is even a <a
                    href="www2.gol.com">Lewis Carroll Society of Japan</a>, which has two
                publications in both Japanese and English. </p>
            <h3>Project Background</h3>
            <p>The translation of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland used for this project is titled
                Arisu wa Fushigi no Kuni de (「アリスはふしぎの国で」) and was translated by Yu Okubo (大久保ゆう訳)
                in 2014. There are several reasons why this edition was chosen. This edition, unlike
                many other translations, is out of copyright. One of the goals of this project is to
                allow the reader to view both the Japanese and English texts side-by-side, to truly
                be able to compare the original with its translation. The recent date of publication
                for this translation also made it appealing, as the language and referenced used
                would likely be more current, and any unknown features of the text would be easier
                to look up. Even the title of this work made it appealing; the deviation of the
                title from the accepted standard title used in the Japanese translation community
                indicated that there might be a larger amount of interesting linguistical features
                embedded within the text. </p>
            <p> The texts used in this project can be found on the text pages, as well as on their
                respective original sources. The edition of the Japanese text can be found at <a
                    href="http://www.aozora.gr.jp/cards/001393/files/57320_57183.html">Aozora
                    Bunko</a>, and the English text can be found at <a
                    href="http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/11?msg=welcome_stranger">Project
                    Gutenberg</a>. </p>
            <h3>Translational Features</h3>
            <p>When translating a work from one language into another, differences between languages
                can cause difficulties in producing a target text from the original. <span
                    class="title">Alice</span> is well known for the difficulties it poses to
                translators. </p>
            <p>Rhyme in particular is a feature that appears with some degree of frequency in
                English songs and poems, but that is almost nonexistent in Japanese. End-rhyme is a
                feature that is much easier to use in English than in Japanese due to word order;
                Japanese typically follows a subject-object-verb (SOV) pattern, whereas English word
                order is subject-verb-object (SVO). For end-rhyme to be present in Japanese poetry,
                one would have to rhyme verb endings and sentence-final particles, which vary based
                on several factors, including tense, formality, tone, and gender. Rhyme is also more
                common in poems that are metrical and contain parallelism (Brooks). English poems
                have strong focus on meter and parallelism, especially in couplets, whereas Japanese
                poems tend to embrace asymmetrical structures with few instances of strong stresses. </p>
            <p>When translation occurs from Japanese into English, translators tend to not only
                change the asymmetrical structure and syllabic patterns of Japanese verse, but also
                that end-rhyme is placed in the English translations where it did not occur before.
                A Japanese tanka might be translated into a rhyming English quatrain (Brooks). </p>
            <p>Idioms can be difficult to translate from one text to the next, as most languages do
                not have exact equivalents of the lexical properties of idiomatic phrases with the
                connotations. Idioms are usually translated in one of several ways: by using an
                idiom with a similar meaning (with either the same types of lexical items or
                different lexical items), by paraphrasing the meaning without an idiom, or by
                omitting the idiom completely (Takacs). </p>
            <p>Similarly, Carroll’s use of word play makes for interesting translation techniques.
                Carroll’s use of puns can offer the same kinds of struggles as idioms do;
                translators must find a set of play on words that not only matches Carroll’s
                original meaning, but that also convey these puns within their own language
                (Lindseth). These problems are often tackled in a similar manner to idioms as well;
                some translators find ingenious ways to convey the similar meaning, while tweaking
                the play on words to make sense in their own language. Although most translators of
                Alice attempt to find a word play equivalent in their own texts, occasionally
                phrases or entire sections of chapter will be omitted due to the difficulty of
                translation. </p>
            <p>Carroll’s use of phonetic and letter-based wordplay often requires translators to
                find similar sounds within their own languages. In cases of alliteration,
                consonance, and similar literary devices, it can sometimes be difficult for
                translators find a series of words with the same sound, especially if the attempt is
                to keep the same sound that Carroll used in his work. </p>
            <!--<h3>Inspiration</h3>
            <p>"Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor
                incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud
                exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute
                irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla
                pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui offici"
                deserunt mollit anim id est laborum."</p>-->
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
        <h2 id="method">Methods</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <h3>Linguistic Methods</h3>
            <p>Two kinds of words were looked for within the texts; nonsense words and incorrect
                word usage. Nonsense words (“ns”) are words that were coined or made up by Carroll
                or Okubo. Incorrect word usage (“iu”) was used as an umbrella term for words that
                are accepted by the dictionary, but that were used in the improper context. </p>
            <p>The translation of play on words (“pow”) was also looked for when analyzing the
                texts. The types of word play focused on were idioms and syntactic play, lexical
                play, and phonetic and phonemic play. Each kind of word play occurs under the same
                tag. Word play that was based on structure or typography were not marked; this kind
                of word play was not as common. The English and this edition of the Japanese are
                also very similar in structure, with the same number of paragraphs per chapter and
                same basic structure to poems and songs.</p>
            <p>Within the text, play on words often occurred in a specific format; a character would
                make a statement that would be misinterpreted by another character, who would
                respond, creating a sense of verbal irony for the reader. These exchanges would
                often occur over multiple paragraphs, which could make tagging while maintaining
                well-formedness difficult. For ease of tagging play on words within the structure of
                the text, only the second part of the play on words phrase would be tagged. For
                example:</p>
            <div class="flex-container">
                <div class="flex-container" id="english"> </div>
                <div class="flex-container" id="japanese"> </div>
            </div>
            <p>Onomatopoeia (“onomatopoeia”) was added later to the project. Japanese uses a larger
                quantity of onomatopoeia than English does, but onomatopoeia is still present within
                the English text.</p>
            <p>Within the original XML files, distinctions were made between words and phrases when
                marking up the text; however, these distinctions have not been included in the
                XHTML. Both &lt;word&gt; and &lt;phrase&gt; tags contained an attribute that was
                allowed the same specifications. Because of this, and because the differences
                between “words” and “phrases” were determined to be insignificant for this project,
                the XHTML includes only the attribute specifications in a &lt;span&gt; without
                distinguishing whether the text is a word or a phrase. </p>
            <p>Not all attribute specifications were included in the final markup on this site;
                originally the texts were also marked up for uncommon word usage (“uc”) and Japanese
                text that ‘matched’ a marked phrase in the English, but that contained no device
                itself (“match”). Uncommon usage was originally placed on the English words and
                phrases that had were considered out-of-date, but they were later left out for
                several reasons. The Japanese translation of <span class="title">Alice</span> used
                in this project was published in 2014, and likely contains modern Japanese in most
                cases. The other reason lies in the proficiency of Japanese of the researchers; as
                neither Dana nor Emily are native Japanese speakers, it would have been difficult to
                know for certain which Japanese was out-of-date. For this reason, the Japanese text
                contains no “uc” tags. Match, however, was left out of the HTML when it was decided
                that the two texts did not to mirror each other in their entirety when rendered on
                the site. </p>

            <h3>Computational Methods</h3>
            <p>We were able to use a variety of languages and systems to fully annotate Alice and
                come out with the data we wanted. As mentioned above, we started out using XML,
                simply by tagging unique features in the text with their own tags. We used a Relax
                NG schema to validate our manuscripts and make sure they had been tagged and
                organized properly. Our website was built using the host obdurodon, the program
                Fetch, and XHTML. We also created several CSS stylesheets in order to properly
                configure our website's aesthetics. </p>
            <p>As the semester went on, we began using XSLT to convert our XML files to XHTML that
                we could put on our website. XSLT also helped us to create visualizations of our
                data, made by turning our XML into SVG files.</p>
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
        <h2 id="acknowledge">Acknowledgements</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <p> Thank you to Dr. Birnbaum, our instructor, and Gabi Keane, our project advisor, for
                their advice, teaching, and support.</p>
            <p> Thank you to the other students in our class for providing other perspectives to
                problems we encountered and helping us to look at things in a different way. </p>
            <p>Thank you to Hiroyuki Good, for his help in locating crucial texts for this
                project.</p>
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
        <h2>About Us</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <p><b>Emily Byron</b> is a freshman (Class of 2021) at the University of Pittsburgh,
                main campus, majoring in linguistics and Japanese.</p>
            <p><b>Dana Kaufhold</b> is also a member of the Class of 2021 at Pitt, and is majoring
                in linguistics and political science.</p>
            <p>Neither of us have had prior coding experience, but we highly recommend this class to
                anyone majoring in Humanities or Social Sciences. You don't need experience - you
                just need enthusiasm.</p>
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
        <h2 id="source">Sources and Links</h2>
        <div class="description">
            <h3>References</h3>
            <p>Brooks, E Bruce. “Nine Maxims on Translation.” Lectures: On Translation. 5 Dec. 2002,
                University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, University of Massachusetts, <a
                    href="https://www.umass.edu/wsp/lectures/translation/rhyme/index.html"
                    >www.umass.edu</a>.<br /> Carroll, Lewis. Alice's Adventures Under Ground.
                British Library, 26 Nov. 1864, <a
                    href="www.bl.uk/collection-items/alices-adventures-under-ground-the-original-manuscript-version-of-alices-adventures-in-wonderland#"
                    >www.bl.uk</a>.<br /> Lindseth, Jon A., and Alan Tannenbaum. Alice in a World of
                Wonderlands: the Translations of Lewis Carroll's Masterpiece. First ed., vol. 1 3,
                Oak Knoll Press, 2015.<br /> Takacs, Csilla. “The Fascination of Translating
                Idioms.” Bulletin of the Transilvania Univ. of Braşov, no. 2, 2015, pp. 41–54. IV,
                    <a href="https://www.ceeol.com/search/article-detail?id=306904"
                    >www.ceeol.com</a>.<br /> Weaver, Warren. Alice in Many Tongues. Univ. of
                Wisconsin Pr., 1964. </p>
            <br />
            <h3>Other Links</h3>
            <p>Our project's <a href="http://github.com/enb34/alice-in-translation"
                >Github</a>.<br /> Our course's <a href="http://dh.obdurodon.org">webpage</a>.<br />
                <a href="http://www.gutenberg.org/">Project Gutenberg</a>, an online source for
                English texts that are out of copyright.<br />
                <a href="http://www.aozora.gr.jp/">Aozora Bunko</a>, an online source for Japanese
                texts that are out of copyright.</p>
            <p><a href="#top">Top</a></p>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
