<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts--Chapter 3</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
                <ul>
                    <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                    <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                    <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                    <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
                </ul>
            </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 3</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"/>Cultural<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu"/>Incorrect Word Usage<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense Words<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"/>Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow"/>Play on Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"/>Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale</h3>
                    <p>They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the birds
                        with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them,
                        and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.</p>
                    <p>The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
                        consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to
                        Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them
                        all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the Lory, who at
                        last turned sulky, and would only say, ‘I am older than you, and must know
                        better’; and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and,
                        as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be
                        said.</p>
                    <p>At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called
                        out, ‘Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! <span class="emp">I’LL</span>
                        soon make you dry enough!’ They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with
                        the Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she
                        felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.</p>
                    <p>‘Ahem!’ said the Mouse with an important air, ‘are you all ready? This is the
                        driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! “<span
                            class="cultural">William the Conqueror</span>, whose cause was favoured
                        by <span class="cultural">the pope</span>, was soon submitted to by the
                        English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to
                        usurpation and conquest. <span class="cultural">Edwin and Morcar, the earls
                            of Mercia and Northumbria</span>--“’</p>
                    <p>‘Ugh!’ said the Lory, with a shiver.</p>
                    <p>‘I beg your pardon!’ said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: ‘Did you
                        speak?’</p>
                    <p>‘Not I!’ said the Lory hastily.</p>
                    <p>‘I thought you did,’ said the Mouse. ‘--I proceed. “Edwin and Morcar, the
                        earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even <span
                            class="cultural">Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury</span>,
                        found it advisable--“’</p>
                    <p>‘Found <span class="emp">WHAT</span>?’ said the Duck.</p>
                    <p>‘Found <span class="emp">IT</span>,’ the Mouse replied rather crossly: ‘of
                        course you know what “it” means.’</p>
                    <p>‘I know what “it” means well enough, when I find a thing,’ said the Duck:
                        ‘it’s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the archbishop
                        find?’</p>
                    <p>The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, ‘“--found it
                        advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the crown.
                        William’s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his <span
                            class="cultural">Normans</span>--” How are you getting on now, my dear?’
                        it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke.</p>
                    <p>‘As wet as ever,’ said Alice in a melancholy tone: ‘it doesn’t seem to dry me
                        at all.’</p>
                    <p>‘In that case,’ said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, ‘I move that the
                        meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
                        remedies--’</p>
                    <p>‘Speak <span class="cultural">English</span>!’ said the Eaglet. ‘I don’t know
                        the meaning of half those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you
                        do either!’ And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the
                        other birds tittered audibly.</p>
                    <p>‘What I was going to say,’ said the Dodo in an offended tone, ‘was, that the
                        best thing to get us dry would be a <span class="pow"
                        >Caucus-race</span>.’</p>
                    <p>‘What <span class="emp">IS</span> a <span class="pow">Caucus-race</span>?’
                        said Alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if
                        it thought that <span class="emp">SOMEBODY</span> ought to speak, and no one
                        else seemed inclined to say anything.</p>
                    <p>‘Why,’ said the Dodo, ‘the best way to explain it is to do it.’ (And, as you
                        might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell you how
                        the Dodo managed it.)</p>
                    <p>First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, [‘the exact shape
                        doesn’t matter,’ it said,) and then all the party were placed along the
                        course, here and there. There was no ‘One, two, three, and away,’ but they
                        began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was
                        not easy to know when the race was over. However, when they had been running
                        half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out
                        ‘The race is over!’ and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, ‘But
                        who has won?’</p>
                    <p>This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and
                        it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the
                        position in which you usually see<span class="cultural"> Shakespeare</span>,
                        in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo
                        said, ‘<span class="emp">EVERYBODY</span> has won, and all must have
                        prizes.’</p>
                    <p>‘But who is to give the prizes?’ quite a chorus of voices asked.</p>
                    <p>‘Why, <span class="emp">SHE</span>, of course,’ said the Dodo, pointing to
                        Alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her,
                        calling out in a confused way, ‘Prizes! Prizes!’</p>
                    <p>Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket,
                        and pulled out a box of <span class="cultural">comfits</span>, (luckily the
                        salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was
                        exactly one a-piece all round.</p>

                    <p>‘But she must have a prize herself, you know,’ said the Mouse.</p>
                    <p>‘Of course,’ the Dodo replied very gravely. ‘What else have you got in your
                        pocket?’ he went on, turning to Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Only a thimble,’ said Alice sadly.</p>
                    <p>‘Hand it over here,’ said the Dodo.</p>
                    <p>Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly presented
                        the thimble, saying ‘We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble’; and,
                        when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.</p>
                    <p>Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that
                        she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say,
                        she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.</p>
                    <p>The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion,
                        as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the
                        small ones choked and had to be patted on the back. However, it was over at
                        last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them
                        something more.</p>
                    <p>‘You promised to tell me your history, you know,’ said Alice, ‘and why it is
                        you hate--C and D,’ she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be
                        offended again.</p>

                    <p>‘Mine is a long and a sad tale!’ said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and
                        sighing.</p>
                    <p>‘It <span class="emp">IS</span> a long <span class="pow">tail</span>,
                        certainly,’ said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse’s tail; ‘<span
                            class="pow">but why do you call it sad?</span>’ And she kept on puzzling
                        about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was
                        something like this:--</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <pre xml:space="preserve">
                             <span class="rp">'Fury said to a<br />
                             mouse That he<br />
                            met in the<br />
                           house,</span>
                         <span class="rp">“Let us<br />
                          both go to<br />
                           law: I will<br />
                            prosecute<br />
                             <span class="emp">YOU</span>.</span>--Come,<br />
                                <span class="rp">I’ll take no<br />
                               denial; We<br />
                              must have a<br />
                            trial:</span>
                          <span class="rp">For really this<br />
                         morning I’ve<br />
                        nothing<br />
                        to do.”</span>
                          <span class="rp">Said the<br />
                          mouse to the<br />
                           cur, “Such<br />
                            a trial,<br />
                             dear Sir,</span>
                                <span class="rp">With<br />
                              no jury<br />
                            or judge,<br />
                           would be<br />
                          wasting<br />
                          our<br />
                          breath.”</span>
                            <span class="rp">“I’ll be<br />
                            judge, I’ll<br />
                             be jury,”<br />
                                 Said<br />
                             cunning<br />
                              old Fury:</span>
                              <span class="rp">“I’ll<br />
                              try the<br />
                                whole<br />
                                cause,<br />
                                  and<br />
                               condemn<br />
                               you<br />
                              to<br />
                               death.”'</span>
            </pre>
                    </div>

                    <p>‘You are not attending!’ said the Mouse to Alice severely. ‘What are you
                        thinking of?’</p>
                    <p>‘I beg your pardon,’ said Alice very humbly: ‘you had got to the fifth bend,
                        I think?’</p>
                    <p>‘I had <span class="emp">
                            <span class="pow">NOT</span>
                        </span>!’ cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.</p>
                    <p>‘A <span class="pow">knot</span>!’ said Alice, always ready to make herself
                        useful, and looking anxiously about her. ‘Oh, <span class="pow">do let me
                            help to undo it</span>!’</p>
                    <p>‘I shall do nothing of the sort,’ said the Mouse, getting up and walking
                        away. ‘You insult me by talking such nonsense!’</p>
                    <p>‘I didn’t mean it!’ pleaded poor Alice. ‘But you’re so easily offended, you
                        know!’</p>
                    <p>The Mouse only growled in reply.</p>
                    <p>‘Please come back and finish your story!’ Alice called after it; and the
                        others all joined in chorus, ‘Yes, please do!’ but the Mouse only shook its
                        head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.</p>
                    <p>‘What a pity it wouldn’t stay!’ sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out
                        of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter
                        ‘Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose <span class="emp"
                            >YOUR</span> temper!’ ‘Hold your tongue, Ma!’ said the young Crab, a
                        little snappishly. ‘You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!’</p>
                    <p>‘I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!’ said Alice aloud, addressing
                        nobody in particular. ‘She’d soon fetch it back!’</p>
                    <p>‘And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?’ said the
                        Lory.</p>
                    <p>Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
                        ‘Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you can’t
                        think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why, she’ll eat a
                        little bird as soon as look at it!’</p>
                    <p>This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the birds
                        hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully,
                        remarking, ‘I really must be getting home; the night-air doesn’t suit my
                        throat!’ and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, ‘Come
                        away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in bed!’ On various pretexts
                        they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.</p>
                    <p>‘I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!’ she said to herself in a melancholy tone.
                        ‘Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best cat in the
                        world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!’ And
                        here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and
                        low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a little <span
                            class="onom">pattering</span> of footsteps in the distance, and she
                        looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was
                        coming back to finish his story.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>ドードーめぐりで長々しっぽり</h3>
                    <p>なんともけったいな絵づらのご一行がほとりにお集まり――羽を引きずった鳥さんたちに、毛がぴたーとなったむくじゃらたち、みんなずぶぬれで気持ち悪くていやな気分。</p>
                    <p>さてここで考えるべきは、どうやってぱさぱさにするか。かわかし方を話し合ううち、ものの数分するとけっこうなじんできたというか、気づいたらみんなと仲良くお話ししていて、生まれたときからの知り合いみたくなっていてね。なるほどインコとは長々言い争ったものだから、しまいにはむすっとされたんだけど、ここで「わたしの方がお姉さんなの、だからモノをもっとわかってるに決まってる」なんて言われようものなら、アリスだって相手のお年を知らないからそんなのうなづけないし、インコも自分からぜったいお年を口にしたくないので、どっちもあとはもう言えない。</p>
                    <p>
                        <span class="onom">とうとう</span>ハツカネズミが、<span class="onom"
                            >そこそこ</span>ひとかどのものみたいだってことで、よびかけてね、「すわれや、みなのしゅう、よおく聞け！　おれがすぐにでもお前らを<span
                            class="onom"
                            >ぱっさぱさ</span>ってほどにしてやる！」すぐさまみんなは大きく輪になってこしを下ろして、ネズミがどまんなか。アリスは気になるとばかりに目をネズミにじいっと、だっていますぐにでもかわかさないと、ひどい<ruby>
                            風邪 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かぜ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を引きそうだと気にやんでいたんだ。</p>
                    <p>「おほん！」とネズミはもったいつけた感じで、「みなのしゅう、いいか？　こいつは知るかぎりいっとうぱっさぱさのやつよ。どうかごせいちょうを！『<span
                            class="cultural">ウィリアム<ruby> 征服王 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>せいふくおう</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>
                        </span>、その<ruby> 大義 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>たいぎ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>
                        <span class="cultural">が<ruby> 教皇 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>きょうこう</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>さま</span>のお目がねにかなったとあって、イングランドの民たみはすぐさまこれにひれふした。上に立つ者もなく、このごろは国が外から荒あらされ平らげられるのが常つねであったからだ。<span
                            class="cultural">エドウィンとモーカー、つまりマーシアとノーサンブリアの主さま</span>は……』」</p>
                    <p>「うげ！」とインコは身ぶるい。</p>
                    <p>「ごめんなすって！」とネズミは顔をしかめながらも、それでいてていねい。「あんた声あげたか？」</p>
                    <p>「いえいえ！」とあわてるインコ。</p>
                    <p>「そうかあ？」とネズミ。「まあ続きよ。『エドウィンとモーカー、つまりマーシアとノーサンブリアの主さまも、味方するとした。<span
                            class="cultural">スティガンド、国うれうカンタベリ大司教までもが<ruby> 得策 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>とくさく</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>
                        </span>だと見たのが……』」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">何</span>と見たって？」とアヒル。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">だ</span>と見た。」とネズミはちょっとむすっと答える。「もちろん<span class="emp"
                            >『だ』</span>の意味はわかんな。」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp">『だ』</span>くらいちゃんとわかっとるわい。<span class="emp"
                            >モノ</span>を見つけりゃあ。」とアヒルは言う。「カエルだ、ミミズだ、ってな。聞きたいのは、大司教が<span class="emp"
                            >『何』</span>を見たのかだ。」</p>
                    <p>ネズミは聞かれたことにぴんと来なかったけれども、あわてて続けてね。「『得策だと見たのが、エドガー親王連れてウィリアムに<ruby> 面会
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>めんかい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>し<ruby> 冠 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かんむり</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を<ruby> 差 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>し出すことで、ウィリアムのふるまいは初めのうちおだやかだった。しかし<ruby> 下部 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しもべ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>の<span class="cultural">ノルマン</span>らしい<ruby> 傲慢 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ごうまん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>な<ruby> 態度 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>たいど</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が……』と、今んとこどんなぐあいだ、なあ？」と言いながらアリスの方を向いている。</p>
                    <p>「まだ<span class="onom">びしょびしょ</span>。」とアリスはしょんぼり、「ぜんぜん<span class="onom"
                            >ぱさぱさ</span>にならなくってよ。」</p>
                    <p>「ならば、」とドードーが立ち上がり大まじめに、「集まりの休会を提議ていぎする、なぜなれば、より<ruby> 効果的 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>こうかてき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>な<ruby> 改善策 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かいぜんさく</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>の速やかなる<ruby> 採用 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さいよう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が……」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="cultural"
                        >国語</span>をしゃべって！」と子ワシ。「そんな長っがーい言葉、半分も意味がわかんないし、どころか君だってさっぱりわかってないじゃない！」ここで子ワシ、うつむいて、にやけた顔をかくしてね。ほかの鳥さんもちらほら聞こえよがしにしのび笑い。</p>
                    <p>「言おうとしたことはただ、」とドードーは気をそこねてね、「<span class="onom"
                            >ぱっさぱさ</span>にするのなら、いちばんいいのは<span class="pow"
                        >ドードーめぐり</span>ということなのだ。」</p>
                    <p>「なに、<span class="pow">ドードーめぐり</span>
                        <span class="emp.dash">って</span>。」と言うアリス。すごく知りたいというわけではなく、ドードーが<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >だれか</span>合いの手を入れよとばかりに間を取っていたのにだれひとりとして口をあけようとはしないようだったからね。</p>
                    <p>「ふむ、」とドードー、「やってみればいちばんよくわかろうて。」（まあ、冬の日なんかにやってみたくなるかもしれないし、ここでドードーが取りしきったことを教えておくね。）</p>
                    <p>まずは走るコースを作る、形は丸（「きっちりした丸でなくてもいい」とドードー）、それでやる人はコースのあっちこっちでいいからつく。「いちについて、よーい、どん！」っていうのもなくて、みんな好きなときに走り出して、好きなときにやめる。だからいつ終わるのかもわかりづらい。それでも半時間くらい続けると、またかなり<span
                            class="onom"
                        >ぱっさぱさ</span>になってきて、そこでいきなりドードーが大声で、「そこまで！」みんなもまわりに集まって、ぜえはあたずねる。「で、だれの勝ち？」</p>
                    <p>この問いかけには、ドードーもものすごく考えないと答えが出てこなくてね、しばらくすわりこんで、ひたいに指１本当ててね（ほら<span
                            class="cultural">シェイクスピア</span>が絵のなかでいつもやってるあの<ruby> 格好 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かっこう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>）、そのあいだのこりのみんなはしずかに待ってる。<span class="onom"
                            >とうとう</span>ドードーが言うんだ、「<span class="emp.dash">みんな</span>の勝ちである、<span
                            class="emp.dash">全員</span>にほうびをさずけねば。」</p>
                    <p>「でも、ごほうびをあたえる役はだれが？」と、みんなの口がそろう。</p>
                    <p>「ふむ、むろん、<span class="emp.dash"
                        >あの子</span>よ。」とドードーはアリスを指さしてね、するとやってた連中がわーっとまわりにむらがってきて、もう口々にわめくんだ、「ごほうび！　ごほうび！」</p>
                    <p>アリスはどうしてよいやらさっぱりで、しょうがないからポケットに手をつっこんで、<span class="cultural"
                            >ドライフルーツの箱</span>を取り出してね（うまいこと<ruby> 塩水 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しおみず</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>は中に入ってなくて）、ごほうびにまわりへわたしていったんだ。ぐるりのみんなにきっちりひとりひとつずつ。</p>
                    <p>「でもあの子にもごほうびをやらねえとな。」とネズミ。</p>
                    <p>「むろん、」とドードーの答えはやっぱり大げさ。「まだ何かそなたのポケットにはあろう？」と続けてアリスを見る。</p>
                    <p>「指ぬきだけです。」と悲しげなアリス。</p>
                    <p>「こっちへかしなされ。」とドードー。</p>
                    <p>で、みんなはふたたびまわりに集まって、そんななかでドードーはぎょうぎょうしく指ぬきをさしだして、こんな言葉。「この見事なる指ぬきをわれらからあなたさまに進ぜよう。」と、この短い<ruby>
                            式典 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しきてん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が終わると、その場のみんなが<span class="onom">ぱちぱち</span>
                        <span class="onom">わあわあ</span>。</p>
                    <p>アリスには何から何までむちゃくちゃだと思えたけど、みんなまじめな顔をするもんだから、ふき出すわけにもいかなくて、でも何も言うことが思いつかないから、とりあえずおじぎをして、指ぬきを受け取って、できるだけ<span
                            class="onom">ぎょうぎょう</span>しい顔をする。</p>
                    <p>続いてお次は、ドライフルーツを食べるだんなんだけど、これがしっちゃかめっちゃかなさわぎになってね、大きな鳥はす<span class="onom"
                            >ぐなくな</span>るとぶつくさ言うし、小さいのはのどにつかえて<ruby> 背中 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>せなか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を<span class="onom">とんとん</span>しなきゃいけないし。それでもなんとか終わって、ふたたび<ruby> 輪
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>わ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>になって、すわって。ネズミに何かまたお話をとおねだり。</p>
                    <p>「だん取りでは、ご自分のむかっ話でしたかしら。」とアリス、「その、なぜおきらいなのか――ネ、とイ、が。」<ruby> 怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>おこ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>らせまいと、こわごわ小声で言ったので、<span class="onom">ところどころ</span>聞こえなくてね。</p>
                    <p>「おれのは、長々しっぽりよ！」とネズミはアリスの方を向いてため息。</p>
                    <p>「長々の<span class="pow">
                            <span class="emp.dash"
                            >お</span>しっぽ</span>、ほんっとに。」とアリスはきらきらした目をネズミのしっぽに下ろしてね、「<span class="pow"
                                >でも、後ろの<span class="emp"
                        >〈りよ〉</span>って何のこと？</span>」そうしてそのことになやんだまま、ネズミも話していったから、だからお話も頭のなかではこんな感じになっちゃって……</p>

                    <div class="song">
                        <p>「イカリーわ<br /> 　　んわんネズ<br /> 　　　　ミにいちゃ<br /> 　　　　　　もん、『出る<br />
                            　　　　　　　　とこ出よう<br /> 　　　　　　　　　ぜ、うった<br /> 　　　　　　　　　　えてやる――<br />
                            　　　　　　　　　　さあ、し<br /> 　　　　　　　　　のごの言<br /> 　　　　　　　うなよ。は<br />
                            　　　　　　　っきりと<br /> 　　　　　おさば<br /> 　　　　きよ。<br /> 　　　今朝は<br /> 　　まあそ<br />
                            　れだけ<br /> にしとい<br /> てやる。』<br /> 　犬ころ<br /> 　　に言う<br /> 　　　ネズミ、<br />
                            　　　　『そんな<br /> 　　　　　のいやだ<br /> 　　　　　　よ、きみ、<br /> 　　　　　　　いったい<br />
                            　　　　　　　　だれがさ<br /> 　　　　　　　　　ばくの、<br /> 　　　　　　　　　ただの時<br />
                            　　　　　　　　間のむだ<br /> 　　　　　　じゃない。』<br /> 　　　　　『さばくの<br /> 　　　　はやっぱ<br />
                            　　　り、おれ<br /> 　　だろ。』<br /> 　と<br /> うら<br /> かく<br /> 　犬<br />
                            　　ころ。<br /> 　　　　『はん<br /> 　　　　　けつは<br /> 　　　　　　出た<br /> 　　　　　　　ぞ、<br />
                            　　　　　　　　言い<br /> 　　　　　　　わた<br /> 　　　　　　す、<br /> 　　　　お前<br /> 　　　　は<br />
                            　死けい。』」 </p>
                    </div>

                    <p>「耳かっぽじってねえな！」とネズミはアリスにびしっと。「何考えてんだ？」</p>

                    <p>「ごめんあそばせ。」とおそれいるアリス。「５つめの曲がり角にいらしたところ、よね？」</p>
                    <p>「わっ<span class="emp.dash">
                            <span class="pow">からんな</span>
                        </span>！」と声をあげるネズミは、<span class="onom">とげとげ</span>ぷんすか。</p>
                    <p>「あ、<span class="pow">からんだ</span>？」と言うアリス、いつでも人の役に立ちたいざかりなので、目をかがやかせて<span
                            class="onom">きょろきょろ</span>してね、「まあ、<span class="pow"
                            >でしたらほどかせていただけて</span>？」</p>
                    <p>「そんなこと何も言わねえよ！」とネズミは立ち上がって、「そんなすっからかんの話でバカにされるなんざ！」</p>
                    <p>「思いちがいよ！」とアリスは苦しまぎれの言いわけ。「でもあなただってずいぶんいらちだこと。」</p>
                    <p>ネズミの返事はただうなり声だけ。</p>
                    <p>「さっさとお話の続きをしめてくださる？」とアリスが<ruby> 背中 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>せなか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>によびかけると、ほかのみんなもあとからそろって、「そうだ、しめるんだ！」ところがネズミは<span class="onom"
                            >いらいら</span>と頭をふるだけで、足早に歩いてゆく。</p>
                    <p>「ざんねん、お去りだなんて！」とインコがため息ついたのは、見えなくなってすぐのこと。そしておばさんガニはついでとばかりにむすめに小言。「ほらね！　つまり、<span
                            class="emp.dash">あなた</span>もかっかしちゃ<span class="emp"
                        >ダメ</span>ってことなのよ！」</p>
                    <p>「ママはだまってて！」と子ガニはややつっけんどん。「がまん強いカキだってどうにかなりそうよ！」</p>
                    <p>「ここにうちのダイナちゃんがいたらな、できるのに！」とアリスの大声は特にだれに向けてというわけでもなく。「<span class="emp.dash"
                            >あの子</span>ならあいつをたちまち連れもどしてきてよ！」</p>
                    <p>「そのダイナってどなた？　よろしければ教えてくださらない？」とインコ。</p>

                    <p>こんな話をしては、一同大さわぎになるわけで――たちまちにげまどう鳥もいたほど、おじさんカササギなんかそうろっと身じたくを始めてこう口に出してね、「そろそろうちに帰らねばな、夜風はのどをいためるので。」それからカナリアは声をふるわせながら子どもたちによびかけてね、「行きましょうさあ！　もうみんなおねんねする時間よ！」いろいろ言いわけを作って去っていくみんな、アリスはたちまちひとりぼっち。</p>
                    <p>「あたくしとしたことがダイナのことを言い出すなんて！」としょんぼりひとりごと。「だれもお好きでないみたい、こちらでは。ぜったい世界一のネコなのに！　ああ、ダイナちゃん！　またちゃんと会えたりするのかしら！」と、ここでかわいそうで、アリスはまた大泣きのはじまり、だって心がとってもせつなくて、しょげていたからね。ところが少しすると、また耳に、かすかに<span
                            class="onom"
                            >ぱたぱた</span>という足音が遠くから聞こえてきたから、はっとして目を上げてね、どこかで思ってたんだ、ネズミが気を<ruby> 変
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>か</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>えて、お話をしにもどってくるんじゃないかって。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
