<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts--Chapter 11</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 11</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"/>Cultural<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu"/>Incorrect Word Usage<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense Words<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"/>Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow"/>Play on Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"/>Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>Who Stole the Tarts?</h3>
                    <p>The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they arrived,
                        with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little birds and
                        beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was standing before
                        them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; and near the King
                        was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment
                        in the other. In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish
                        of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite hungry to
                        look at them--‘I wish they’d get the trial done,’ she thought, ‘and hand
                        round the refreshments!’ But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she
                        began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time.</p>
                    <p>Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about
                        them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of
                        nearly everything there. ‘That’s the judge,’ she said to herself, ‘because
                        of his great wig.’</p>
                    <p>The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the wig,
                        (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look
                        at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.</p>
                    <p>‘And that’s the jury-box,’ thought Alice, ‘and those twelve creatures,’ (she
                        was obliged to say ‘creatures,’ you see, because some of them were animals,
                        and some were birds,) ‘I suppose they are the jurors.’ She said this last
                        word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she
                        thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the
                        meaning of it at all. However, ‘jury-men’ would have done just as well.</p>
                    <p>The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. ‘What are they
                        doing?’ Alice whispered to the Gryphon. ‘They can’t have anything to put
                        down yet, before the trial’s begun.’</p>
                    <p>‘They’re putting down their names,’ the Gryphon whispered in reply, ‘for fear
                        they should forget them before the end of the trial.’</p>
                    <p>‘Stupid things!’ Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
                        hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, ‘Silence in the court!’ and the
                        King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was
                        talking.</p>
                    <p>Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that
                        all the jurors were writing down ‘stupid things!’ on their slates, and she
                        could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell ‘stupid,’ and
                        that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. ‘A nice muddle their slates’ll
                        be in before the trial’s over!’ thought Alice.</p>
                    <p>One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice could not
                        stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found
                        an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly that the poor little
                        juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of
                        it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one
                        finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left
                        no mark on the slate.</p>
                    <p>‘Herald, read the accusation!’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then unrolled
                        the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp035"> ‘The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts, </span>
                            <span class="rp036"> All on a summer day: </span>
                            <span class="rp035"> The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts, </span>
                            <span class="rp036"> And took them quite away!’ </span>
                        </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>‘Consider your verdict,’ the King said to the jury.</p>
                    <p>‘Not yet, not yet!’ the Rabbit hastily interrupted. ‘There’s a great deal to
                        come before that!’</p>
                    <p>‘Call the first witness,’ said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three
                        blasts on the trumpet, and called out, ‘First witness!’</p>
                    <p>The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand and a
                        piece of bread-and-butter in the other. ‘I beg pardon, your Majesty,’ he
                        began, ‘for bringing these in: but I hadn’t quite finished my tea when I was
                        sent for.’</p>
                    <p>‘You ought to have finished,’ said the King. ‘When did you begin?’</p>
                    <p>The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the court,
                        arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. ‘Fourteenth of March, I think it was,’ he
                        said.</p>
                    <p>‘Fifteenth,’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘Sixteenth,’ added the Dormouse.</p>
                    <p>‘Write that down,’ the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down
                        all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and reduced the
                        answer to shillings and pence.</p>
                    <p>‘Take off your hat,’ the King said to the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>‘It isn’t mine,’ said the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>‘Stolen!’ the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a
                        memorandum of the fact.</p>
                    <p>‘I keep them to sell,’ the Hatter added as an explanation; ‘I’ve none of my
                        own. I’m a hatter.’</p>
                    <p>Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter, who
                        turned pale and fidgeted.</p>
                    <p>‘Give your evidence,’ said the King; ‘and don’t be nervous, or I’ll have you
                        executed on the spot.’</p>
                    <p>This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one
                        foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his confusion he
                        bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.</p>
                    <p>Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a
                        good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger
                        again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on
                        second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was
                        room for her.</p>
                    <p>‘I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.’ said the Dormouse, who was sitting next to
                        her. ‘I can hardly breathe.’</p>
                    <p>‘I can’t help it,’ said Alice very meekly: ‘I’m growing.’</p>
                    <p>‘You’ve no right to grow here,’ said the Dormouse.</p>
                    <p>‘Don’t talk nonsense,’ said Alice more boldly: ‘you know you’re growing
                        too.’</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,’ said the Dormouse: ‘not in that
                        ridiculous fashion.’ And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the
                        other side of the court.</p>
                    <p>All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and, just
                        as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the
                        court, ‘Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!’ on which the
                        wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.</p>
                    <p>‘Give your evidence,’ the King repeated angrily, ‘or I’ll have you executed,
                        whether you’re nervous or not.’</p>
                    <p>‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
                        ‘--and I hadn’t begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
                        bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--’</p>
                    <p>‘The twinkling of the what?’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>‘It began with the tea,’ the Hatter replied.</p>
                    <p>‘Of course <span class="pow">twinkling begins with a T</span>!’ said the King
                        sharply. ‘Do you take me for a dunce? Go on!’</p>
                    <p>‘I’m a poor man,’ the Hatter went on, ‘and most things twinkled after
                        that--only the March Hare said--’</p>
                    <p>‘I didn’t!’ the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.</p>
                    <p>‘You did!’ said the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>‘I deny it!’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘He denies it,’ said the King: ‘leave out that part.’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--’ the Hatter went on, looking
                        anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
                        nothing, being fast asleep.</p>
                    <p>‘After that,’ continued the Hatter, ‘I cut some more bread-and-butter--’</p>
                    <p>‘But what did the Dormouse say?’ one of the jury asked.</p>
                    <p>‘That I can’t remember,’ said the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>‘You <span class="emp">MUST</span> remember,’ remarked the King, ‘or I’ll
                        have you executed.’</p>
                    <p>The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went down
                        on one knee. ‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ he began.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">You’re a very poor speaker</span>,’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by the
                        officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just explain
                        to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the
                        mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and
                        then sat upon it.)</p>
                    <p>‘I’m glad I’ve seen that done,’ thought Alice. ‘I’ve so often read in the
                        newspapers, at the end of trials, “There was some attempts at applause,
                        which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court,” and I never
                        understood what it meant till now.’</p>
                    <p>‘If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,’ continued the
                        King.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">I can’t go no lower</span>,’ said the Hatter: ‘I’m on the
                        floor, as it is.’</p>
                    <p>‘Then you may <span class="emp">SIT</span> down,’ the King replied.</p>
                    <p>Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.</p>
                    <p>‘Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!’ thought Alice. ‘Now we shall get on
                        better.’</p>
                    <p>‘I’d rather finish my tea,’ said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the
                        Queen, who was reading the list of singers.</p>
                    <p>‘You may go,’ said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court, without
                        even waiting to put his shoes on.</p>
                    <p>‘--and just take his head off outside,’ the Queen added to one of the
                        officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to
                        the door.</p>
                    <p>‘Call the next witness!’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the pepper-box in her
                        hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by
                        the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.</p>
                    <p>‘Give your evidence,’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>‘Shan’t,’ said the cook.</p>
                    <p>The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice, ‘Your
                        Majesty must cross-examine <span class="emp">THIS</span> witness.’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, if I must, I must,’ the King said, with a melancholy air, and, after
                        folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of
                        sight, he said in a deep voice, ‘What are tarts made of?’</p>
                    <p>‘Pepper, mostly,’ said the cook.</p>
                    <p>‘Treacle,’ said a sleepy voice behind her.</p>
                    <p>‘Collar that Dormouse,’ the Queen shrieked out. ‘Behead that Dormouse! Turn
                        that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
                        whiskers!’</p>
                    <p>For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
                        turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
                        disappeared.</p>
                    <p>‘Never mind!’ said the King, with an air of great relief. ‘Call the next
                        witness.’ And he added in an undertone to the Queen, ‘Really, my dear, <span
                            class="emp">YOU</span> must cross-examine the next witness. It quite
                        makes my forehead ache!’</p>
                    <p>Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
                        curious to see what the next witness would be like, ‘--for they haven’t got
                        much evidence <span class="emp">YET</span>,’ she said to herself. Imagine
                        her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill
                        little voice, the name ‘Alice!’</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>　だあれがタルトをぬすんだの</h3>
                    <p>着くと、キングとクイーンが高いところにすわっていて、そのまわりにはおおぜいがお集まり――ありとある鳥さんけものさん、それにもちろんひとそろいのトランプも。ジャックがその前に立たされて、くさりにつながれたままで、左右を強者にかためられていてね。それにキングのわきにはあの白ウサギ、片手にトランペット、もう片手に羊の皮のまき紙。おさばきの場のどまんなかにあるテーブル、その上にタルトをのせた大皿が１まい。見ばえがすごくよかったのでアリスは見るなりはらぺこになっちゃってね――「おさばきなんてとうに終わって、」とか思う、「おやつでも配ってくれたらいいのに！」ところがそんな段取りはどうにもないみたいで、そこでとりあえずまわりをしらみつぶしにながめてひまつぶし。</p>
                    <p>アリスもおさばきの場自体、ものの本では読んだことがあるだけで、来たのは初めてだったけど、そこにいただいたいのやつらが顔見知りとわかってたいへんほっとしてね。「あれがさばきを下すひと、」とひとりごと、「だって大きなカツラだし。」</p>
                    <p>ところでそのさばきを下すひとこそキングそのひと。カツラの上に王さまのかんむりをちょこん（どんな具合かたしかめたいひとははじめにある大きな絵を見てね）、どう見てもすわりが悪く、明らかに<ruby>
                            似合 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>にあ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ってなくて。</p>
                    <p>「それとあれが、話し合うひとの<ruby> 座席 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ざせき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ね。」と思うアリス、「それに、生き物が１２ひき。」（やむをえず「生き物」と口にしたんだけど、ほら、何せけものもいれば鳥もいるからね、）「つまり<ruby>
                            裁判員 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さいばんいん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>。」この言葉を２度３度自分に言い聞かせては、ちょっぴりほこらしげ。だって、無理もないのだけれど、ふつう同い年の女の子たちにはそんなことわかる子なんていないと思ってたからね。どんなおさばきを下すか話し合う人たちのことなんだけど。</p>
                    <p>１２ひきの裁判員はみんなせわしなく手持ち黒板に何か書き付けていて。「何をしてるの？」とアリスがグリフォンに<span class="onom"
                            >ひそひそ</span>。「何も書きとめることなんてないはずなのに、おさばきが始まるまで。」</p>
                    <p>「自分の名前を書き付けてんだ、」と返事するグリフォンも<span class="onom"
                        >ひそひそ</span>、「お開きになるより先にわすれちまうとこまるからな。」</p>
                    <p>「バッカみたい！」アリスの声にもいらいらがこもりだしたんだけど、あわててこらえてね、だって白ウサギが声をはりあげて「お<ruby> 静
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しず</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>かに！」って、それからキングもメガネをかけて、<span class="onom"
                        >そわそわ</span>ながめまわして、声の主をつきとめようとしたものだから。</p>
                    <p>アリスの目からは、そいつらのかたごしに見える感じなんだけど、裁判員はみんな「バカみたい！」と手持ち黒板に書きとめていてね、そのうちひとりが「バカみたい」をどういう字で書くのかわかっていないのもこっちに見て取れて、どうもとなりに教えてとたのみこむ羽目になったみたいで。「お開きうんぬんの前にあの黒板がめためたになりそう！」と思うアリス。</p>
                    <p>それに裁判員のひとりが、チョークを<span class="onom">きぃきぃ</span>言わせていたんだ。これにはもちろんアリスはたえ<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >きれ</span>なくって、おさばきの場をぐるっと回り、そいつの背後に立って、すきをねらってさっと取り上げてしまってね。あまりのすばやい手ぎわに、かわいそうに裁判員（トカゲのビル）さんには何が何だかさっぱりわからず、そこであたりを探し回ったあげく、しかたなく最後まで指１本で書くことにしたのに、まったく役に立たずで黒板には何のあともつかない。</p>
                    <p>「しきり役！　おかされた罪を読み上げよ！」とキング。</p>
                    <p>これを受けて、白ウサギはトランペットを３ふき、それからまき紙を広げて、こう読み上げる――</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>ハートのクインがタルトを作る<br /> 夏のさなか１日かけて<br /> ハートのジャックがタルトをぬすむ<br />
                            かくれてこっそりひとりじめ！</p>
                    </div>
                    <p>「さあ、おさばきを話し合え。」と裁判員へつげるキング。</p>
                    <p>「まだ、まだで！」と、あわてて止める白ウサギ。「その前にやることがたっくさんおじゃりまする！」</p>
                    <p>「ひとりめにわけを聞くぞえ。」とキング。すると白ウサギはトランペットを３ふき、声をはりあげる。「ひとりめ！」</p>
                    <p>はじめにわけを話すのは、ぼうし屋。入ってくると手にはティーカップ、もう片手にはバターのぬられたパン。「失礼をば、キングさま。」と切り出してね、「このようなものを持ちこみ。ですが、よばれたさいは、お茶会のまっ最中でしたもので。」</p>
                    <p>「すませておくべきであるぞ。」とキング。「いつ始めた？」</p>
                    <p>ぼうし屋がヤヨイウサギに目をやると、あとから入ってきたそいつはヤマネとうでを組んでいてね。「３月１４日です、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >おそらく</span>は。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「１５日。」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「１６日。」とヤマネ。</p>
                    <p>「書きとめよ。」と裁判員へつげるキング。すると裁判員は<ruby> 熱心 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ねっしん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>にその３つの日付を手持ち黒板に書きとめ、そのあと足し算して、その和をお金の単位たんいに直したんだ。</p>
                    <p>「それを取れ、その<ruby> 方 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ほう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>の帽子じゃ！」とキングはぼうし屋へ言いつけてね。</p>
                    <p>「わがものではなく。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ぬすみおったか</span>！」とさけぶキング、裁判員の方を向くと、すぐさま一同はこのことをひかえる。</p>
                    <p>「これは売り物で。」と言いわけをあとからするぼうし屋。「わがものではなく、ぼうし屋でありますゆえ。」</p>
                    <p>ここでクイーンはメガネをかけ、ぼうし屋をじぃとにらみつけるたので、ぼうし屋も心おだやかでなく、顔もまっ<ruby> 青 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さお</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>。</p>
                    <p>「はよう次第をのべよ、」とキング、「<span class="onom">びくびく</span>するでない、さもなくばただちに処すぞ。」</p>
                    <p>これで相手に先をうながせるわけもなくてね。足の重心を左右に行ったり来たりさせつつ、<span class="onom"
                        >そわそわ</span>とクイーンを見やるんだけど、取りみだすあまり本当ならパンをかじるところを、ティーカップをがりっといっちゃって。</p>
                    <p>ちょうどこのときなんだけど、アリスはひどく<span class="onom"
                            >ぞくぞく</span>して、へんてこな気分になってね、自分でもしばらくなぜだかちっともわからなかったんだけど、どういうことなのかとうとうわかった。また身体が大きくなりだしていてね、ひとまず立ち上がって<ruby>
                            席 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>せき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を外そうかと思ったんだけど考え直して、<span class="onom"
                        >ぎりぎり</span>すわれるまではそこにいすわることにしたんだ。</p>
                    <p>「そんなにつめないでくださいな。」と、となりにすわっていたヤマネが言ってね。「息苦しい。」</p>
                    <p>「どうしようもないの。」と、とてもすなおなアリス。「育ちざかりなんだもん。」</p>
                    <p>「だからって、<span class="emp.dash">ここで</span>勝手に大きくなるなです。」とヤマネ。</p>
                    <p>「すっからかんな言い分。」と今度はアリスもふてぶてしい。「ほら、あなただって育つんだから。」</p>
                    <p>「そうですけど大きくなるかげんはわきまえてますよ。」とヤマネ。「そんなふざけた育ち方なんてしません。」そうしてひどくむっとして席を立つと、さばきの場の向かいがわへまたいでいってしまって。</p>
                    <p>このあいだずっとクイーンはたえずぼうし屋をにらみつけていてね、ちょうどヤマネがおさばきの場をまたいだときに、その場にひかえていたやつへこう申しつける、「先の音楽会の歌い手の名ぼを持って参れ！」するととたんに、あわれにもぼうし屋は<span
                            class="onom">ぶるぶる</span>ふるえだして、両足ともくつがぬげてしまう始末。</p>
                    <p>「次第をのべよ。」とくり返すキングはかんかん、「さもなくば<span class="onom">びくびく</span>のいかんを問わず処すぞ。」</p>
                    <p>「わがはいはつまらぬものです、キングさま。」と話し出したぼうし屋はふるえ声、「それにお茶を始めてより――まだ１週間もございません――パンは次第に<span
                            class="onom">かっぴかぴ</span>となり――<span class="onom">てぇかてか</span>のお茶……」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="onom">てぇか</span>の、<span class="emp.dash">何</span>とな。」とキング。</p>
                    <p>「お茶の<span class="emp.dash">こと</span>にございますか。」と答えるぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「ふむ、<span class="pow">そりゃお茶は『てぇ』<span class="emp.dash"
                        >とも</span>言うわい</span>！」とキングの声はとげとげしい。「わしをバカにしておるのか？　続けよ！」</p>
                    <p>「わがはいはつまらぬものですが、」と続けるぼうし屋、「そのあとあちこちがてかてかと――ただヤヨイウサギが申すには……」</p>
                    <p>「言わねえ！」と大あわてで口をはさむヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「言った！」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「まちがいだ！」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「まちがいか。」とキング。「ではその部分を消すがよい。」</p>
                    <p>「ではとにかくヤマネが申すには……」と続けたぼうし屋が気づかわしげにあたりを見て、まちがいと申し立てられないかとたしかめるも、ヤマネは何も申し立てずぐっすりすやすや。</p>
                    <p>「そのあと、」とそのまま話し出すぼうし屋、「わがはいはバターのぬられたパンをもう少しとちぎりまして……」</p>
                    <p>「あの、ヤマネは何と言ったんで？」と裁判員のひとりがたずねる。</p>
                    <p>「それが思い出せず。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「思い出さ<span class="emp.dash">ねば</span>、」と言い出すキング、「処すぞ！」</p>
                    <p>あわれにもぼうし屋はティーカップとパンを落として、片ひざをついてね。「わがはいはつまらぬものでございます、キングさま。」と言い出すんだけど。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">
                            <span class="emp.dash">たしかに</span>その<ruby> 方 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>ほう</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>の<span class="emp.dash">話</span>はつまらん</span>！」とキング。</p>
                    <p>ここでモルモットが１ぴき手を<span class="onom"
                        >ぱちぱち</span>とたたいたんだけど、ひかえていたやつらにたちまち取りおさえられてね。（っていうのはちょっとややこしい言い方かな、どうなったのかちゃんと話すね。大きくしっかりした布のふくろ、口のところをひもでしばるやつをもってきて、そのなかにモルモットを頭から取り入れて、その上からすわっておさえたんだ。）</p>
                    <p>「うれしい、こんなの見られるなんて。」と思うアリス。「新聞では読んだことあったけど、おさばきの終わりに『ざわめくもたちまちひかえていた役人によって取り押さえられた』って、今ようやくなるほどとなってよ。」</p>
                    <p>「それだけしか知らんのなら、もう下がるがよい。」と先を続けるキング。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">これより下へは行けません</span>。」とぼうし屋。「ゆかをつきぬけろとおっしゃる？」</p>
                    <p>「ならば、<span class="emp.dash">しり</span>をゆかにつけい。」と答えるキング。</p>
                    <p>ここでもう１ぴきのモルモットが手をたたいたが、また取りおさえられる。</p>
                    <p>「ふうん、これでモルモットはみんな片づいたってわけ！」と思うアリス。「ようやくおさばきもはかどってよ。」</p>
                    <p>「よろしければお茶の方をすませても。」と言うぼうし屋は、気づかわしげにクイーンを見やったけれど、歌い手の名ぼを読みふっていて。</p>
                    <p>「かまわん行け。」とキングが言うので、ぼうし屋はかけ足でおさばきの場をあとにしたんだけど、くつをはき直すのをどわすれしちゃった。</p>
                    <p>「……そして外でやつの首をはねよ！」と追ってクイーンはひかえている者に言いつけたんだけど、ひかえの者がドアにたどりつくより先にもう、ぼうし屋のすがたはどこへやら。</p>
                    <p>「次のもの入れ！」とキング。</p>
                    <p>その次にわけを聞くのは御前さまのコック。手にコショウびんを持っていてね、アリスはそのひとが入ってくる前からだれだか当てがついたんだけど、それというのもドア付近のひとたちがみんないっせいにくしゃみをしたから。</p>
                    <p>「そこなもの、わけを話せ。」とキング。</p>
                    <p>「まっぴらだね！」とコック。</p>
                    <p>キングの気づかわしげな目にさらされて、白ウサギが小声で、「やむをえませぬ、反対にご自身から<span class="emp.dash"
                            >この者</span>に次第をたずねてみては。」</p>
                    <p>「ふむ、やむをえぬならやむをえぬ。」とだるそうなキングはうで組みをして、コックにまゆをしかめるんだけど、そのせいで目はほとんど皮にうもれてしまってね、重々しい声で言うんだ、「タルトは何でできておる？」</p>
                    <p>「だいたいコショウさ。」とコック。</p>
                    <p>「シロップです。」とその後ろからねむたげな声。</p>
                    <p>「そのヤマネを首ねっこじゃ！」と声をしぼり上げるクイーン。「そのヤマネは打ち首じゃ！　そのヤマネをつまみ出せ！　取りおさえよ！　しょっぴけ！　ヒゲをちょん切れええ！」</p>
                    <p>しばらくのあいだ、おさばきの場はしっちゃかめっちゃか、ヤマネは外へつまみ出され、みんながもとの場所にもどったころには、コックもすがたを消していて。</p>
                    <p>「かまうな！」とキングは大きくほっと息をついてね。「次のものをよべい。」それから、そのあとクイーンに向かって、おさえた声音で、「やむをえん、実はの、次は<span
                            class="emp.dash">おまえ</span>がたずねる役をやってくれんか。ひどくしかめっ痛つうがするのでな！」</p>
                    <p>アリスが様子をうかがっていると、白ウサギが名ぼを<span class="onom"
                            >いじいじ</span>していたので、次によばれるのがどんなひとなのかとっても<span class="onom"
                            >わくわく</span>してきてね、「――だって事と次第があんまりはっきりしてないもん、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >まだ</span>。」とひとりごと。どんなにその子がびっくりしたことか、そのとき白ウサギが読み上げた、ふりしぼって声高にさけんだ名前はなんと、「アリス！」</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
