<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 8</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"
                             />Cultural<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu" />Incorrect Word
                            Usage<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense
                            Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"
                             />Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow" />Play on
                            Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"
                             />Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>The Queen’s Croquet-Ground</h3>
                    <p>A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on
                        it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them
                        red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch
                        them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, ‘Look out
                        now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint over me like that!’</p>
                    <p>‘I couldn’t help it,’ said Five, in a sulky tone; ‘Seven jogged my
                        elbow.’</p>
                    <p>On which Seven looked up and said, ‘That’s right, Five! Always lay the blame
                        on others!’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">YOU’D</span> better not talk!’ said Five. ‘I heard the
                        Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!’</p>
                    <p>‘What for?’ said the one who had spoken first.</p>
                    <p>‘That’s none of <span class="emp">YOUR</span> business, Two!’ said Seven.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, it <span class="emp">IS</span> his business!’ said Five, ‘and I’ll tell
                        him--it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.’</p>
                    <p>Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun ‘Well, of all the unjust
                        things--’ when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
                        them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all
                        of them bowed low.</p>
                    <p>‘Would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little timidly, ‘why you are painting
                        those roses?’</p>
                    <p>Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low voice,
                        ‘Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a <span
                            class="emp">RED</span> rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake;
                        and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off,
                        you know. So you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to--’ At
                        this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
                        out ‘The Queen! The Queen!’ and the three gardeners instantly threw
                        themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, and
                        Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.</p>
                    <p>First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three
                        gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next
                        the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked
                        two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came the royal children; there
                        were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in
                        hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the
                        guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White
                        Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything
                        that was said, and went by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of
                        Hearts, carrying the King’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of
                        all this grand procession, came <span class="emp">THE KING AND QUEEN OF
                            HEARTS</span>.</p>
                    <p>Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like
                        the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a
                        rule at processions; ‘and besides, what would be the use of a procession,’
                        thought she, ‘if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they
                        couldn’t see it?’ So she stood still where she was, and waited.</p>
                    <p>When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at
                        her, and the Queen said severely ‘Who is this?’ She said it to the Knave of
                        Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.</p>
                    <p>‘Idiot!’ said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice,
                        she went on, ‘What’s your name, child?’</p>
                    <p>‘My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,’ said Alice very politely; but she
                        added, to herself, ‘Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after all. I needn’t
                        be afraid of them!’</p>
                    <p>‘And who are <span class="emp">THESE</span>?’ said the Queen, pointing to the
                        three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they
                        were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as
                        the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or
                        soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.</p>
                    <p>‘How should I know?’ said Alice, surprised at her own courage. ‘It’s no
                        business of <span class="emp">MINE</span>.’</p>
                    <p>The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment
                        like a wild beast, screamed ‘Off with her head! Off--’</p>
                    <p>‘Nonsense!’ said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
                        silent.</p>
                    <p>The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said ‘Consider, my dear: she
                        is only a child!’</p>
                    <p>The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave ‘Turn them
                        over!’</p>
                    <p>The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.</p>
                    <p>‘Get up!’ said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners
                        instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen, the royal
                        children, and everybody else.</p>
                    <p>‘Leave off that!’ screamed the Queen. ‘You make me giddy.’ And then, turning
                        to the rose-tree, she went on, ‘What <span class="emp">HAVE</span> you been
                        doing here?’</p>
                    <p>‘May it please your Majesty,’ said Two, in a very humble tone, going down on
                        one knee as he spoke, ‘we were trying--’</p>
                    <p>‘I see!’ said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. ‘Off
                        with their heads!’ and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers
                        remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for
                        protection.</p>
                    <p>‘You shan’t be beheaded!’ said Alice, and she put them into a large
                        flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a minute
                        or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.</p>
                    <p>‘Are their heads off?’ shouted the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!’ the soldiers shouted in
                        reply.</p>
                    <p>‘That’s right!’ shouted the Queen. ‘Can you play croquet?’</p>
                    <p>The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was evidently
                        meant for her.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes!’ shouted Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Come on, then!’ roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession, wondering
                        very much what would happen next.</p>
                    <p>‘It’s--it’s a very fine day!’ said a timid voice at her side. She was walking
                        by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.</p>
                    <p>‘Very,’ said Alice: ‘--where’s the Duchess?’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="onom">Hush! Hush!</span>’ said the Rabbit in a low, hurried
                        tone. He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
                        himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered ‘She’s
                        under sentence of execution.’</p>
                    <p>‘What for?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Did you say “What a pity!”?’ the Rabbit asked.</p>
                    <p>‘No, I didn’t,’ said Alice: ‘I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I said “What
                        for?”’</p>
                    <p>‘She boxed the Queen’s ears--’ the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little scream
                        of laughter. ‘Oh, hush!’ the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. ‘The
                        Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the Queen
                        said--’</p>
                    <p>‘Get to your places!’ shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people
                        began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other;
                        however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began.</p>
                    <p> Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life;
                        it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets
                        live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand
                        on their hands and feet, to make the arches.</p>
                    <p>The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she
                        succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her
                        arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck
                        nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its
                        head, it <span class="emp">WOULD</span> twist itself round and look up in
                        her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting
                        out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin
                        again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself,
                        and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a
                        ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and,
                        as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other
                        parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
                        difficult game indeed.</p>
                    <p>The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the
                        while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen
                        was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting ‘Off with
                        his head!’ or ‘Off with her head!’ about once in a minute.</p>
                    <p>Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
                        dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, ‘and
                        then,’ thought she, ‘what would become of me? They’re dreadfully fond of
                        beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any one left
                        alive!’</p>
                    <p>She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could
                        get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the
                        air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or
                        two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself ‘It’s the
                        Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.’</p>
                    <p>‘How are you getting on?’ said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for
                        it to speak with.</p>
                    <p>Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. ‘It’s no use speaking
                        to it,’ she thought, ‘till its ears have come, or at least one of them.’ In
                        another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her
                        flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had
                        someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was enough of
                        it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.</p>
                    <p>‘I don’t think they play at all fairly,’ Alice began, in rather a complaining
                        tone, ‘and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear oneself speak--and
                        they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are,
                        nobody attends to them--and you’ve no idea how confusing it is all the
                        things being alive; for instance, there’s the arch I’ve got to go through
                        next walking about at the other end of the ground--and I should have
                        croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine
                        coming!’</p>
                    <p>‘How do you like the Queen?’ said the Cat in a low voice.</p>
                    <p>‘Not at all,’ said Alice: ‘she’s so extremely--’ Just then she noticed that
                        the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, ‘--likely to win,
                        that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.’</p>
                    <p>The Queen smiled and passed on.</p>
                    <p>‘Who <span class="emp">ARE</span> you talking to?’ said the King, going up to
                        Alice, and looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.</p>
                    <p>‘It’s a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,’ said Alice: ‘allow me to introduce
                        it.’</p>
                    <p>‘I don’t like the look of it at all,’ said the King: ‘however, it may kiss my
                        hand if it likes.’</p>
                    <p>‘I’d rather not,’ the Cat remarked.</p>
                    <p>‘Don’t be impertinent,’ said the King, ‘and don’t look at me like that!’ He
                        got behind Alice as he spoke.</p>
                    <p>‘A cat may look at a king,’ said Alice. ‘I’ve read that in some book, but I
                        don’t remember where.’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, it must be removed,’ said the King very decidedly, and he called the
                        Queen, who was passing at the moment, ‘My dear! I wish you would have this
                        cat removed!’</p>
                    <p>The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. ‘Off
                        with his head!’ she said, without even looking round.</p>
                    <p>‘I’ll fetch the executioner myself,’ said the King eagerly, and he hurried
                        off.</p>
                    <p>Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on,
                        as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with passion. She
                        had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for
                        having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all,
                        as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her
                        turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.</p>
                    <p>The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to
                        Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other:
                        the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side
                        of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to
                        fly up into a tree.</p>
                    <p>By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was
                        over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: ‘but it doesn’t matter
                        much,’ thought Alice, ‘as all the arches are gone from this side of the
                        ground.’ So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape
                        again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.</p>
                    <p>When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
                        large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the
                        executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while
                        all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.</p>
                    <p>The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the
                        question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all
                        spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they
                        said.</p>
                    <p>The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless there
                        was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing
                        before, and he wasn’t going to begin at <span class="emp">HIS</span> time of
                        life.</p>
                    <p>The King’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and
                        that you weren’t to talk nonsense.</p>
                    <p>The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in less than
                        no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last remark
                        that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)</p>
                    <p>Alice could think of nothing else to say but ‘It belongs to the Duchess:
                        you’d better ask <span class="emp">HER</span> about it.’</p>
                    <p>‘She’s in prison,’ the Queen said to the executioner: ‘fetch her here.’ And
                        the executioner went off like an arrow.</p>
                    <p> The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he
                        had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and
                        the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the
                        party went back to the game.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter" id="08">
                    <h3>クイーンさまのクローケー場</h3>
                    <p>大きなバラの木が１本、庭を入ったところに立っていて、さいてるバラはどれも白なのに、その場にいた３まいの庭係が、<span class="onom"
                            >いそいそ</span>とそいつを赤にぬっていてね。これがアリスにはすごくへんてこなことに思えたものだから、そばでじっくり見ようと足を向けると、近づくなり聞こえてくる、うちひとりの言葉、「おい気ぃつけろよ、５！　そんなふうにこっちへ絵の具をはねかけんな、こら！」</p>
                    <p>「しょうがねえだろ。」と５はむっとした声を返す、「７がこっちのひじを小づきやがった。」</p>
                    <p>それに７も見上げて口をはさむ、「やんのか、５！　いつもいつもひとのせいにしやがって！」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >てめえ</span>言ってるばあいかよ！」と５。「聞いたぜつい昨日、クインのやつがてめえは打ち首ものだっつってな！」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp">ワケ</span>は？」と口火を切ったやつ。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">てめえ</span>の知ったこっちゃねえだろ、２！」と７。</p>
                    <p>「いいや、知ったこっちゃ<span class="emp.dash">ある</span>んだな！」と５、「だから教えてやんよ――<span
                            class="emp">ワケ</span>ってのはタマネギとまちがえてチューリップの根っこを料理係に持ってったってな！」</p>
                    <p>７は<span class="emp"
                        >ハケ</span>を放り出してまくし立てる、「はあ！　そんなおかどちげえ――」とここでたまたま目にうつるアリス、じーっとのぞきこんでいたから向こうはふいに言葉をつまらせてね。ほかの２まいもふり返り、みんなしてふかぶかおじぎ。</p>
                    <p>「教えていただけて？」とアリスはちょっぴり<span class="onom">おずおず</span>、「どうしてバラに色なんかつけてらして？」</p>
                    <p>５と７はおしだまって２をにらむだけ。そこで２が小声で、「その何だ、実はさ、ほら、じょうちゃん、本当はこいつ赤いバラの木のはずだったんだけど、手ちがいで<span
                            class="emp">オレら</span>白いのを植えちまってさ、クインに見つかるはめにでもあったら、もう<span class="emp"
                            >オレら</span>みんなそろって首切られるってワケよ。つーわけでさ、じょうちゃん、来ないうちにやれることやっとこ――」と、まさにこのとき、庭の向こうを<span
                            class="onom"
                        >そわそわ</span>と見つめていた５が声をあげる、「クインのやつだ！　クインだ！」庭係の３まいはあわててぺたんとうつぶせにたおれる。おおぜいの足音にふり返ったアリスは、当のクイーンにじいっと目をそそぐ。</p>

                    <p>まずやってきたのが、こんぼうをかまえた１０まいの<ruby> 強者 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>つわもの</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>たち、すがた形は庭係３まいと同じで、長四角の<span class="onom"
                            >ぺらぺら</span>、角のところに手足がついててね。お次は１０まいのそばづかえ、ダイヤにそろって色取られ、強者と同じで２列になって歩いている。そのあとに来るのが王子さま王女さま、１０まいいらっしゃて、このかわい子ちゃんたち２人１組で手をつないで、<span
                            class="onom"
                            >うきうき</span>軽やかに進む、そろってハートがらのおあしらい。次に来るのがお歴々、キングにクイーンがほとんどだけど、そこでそのなかにアリスはあの白ウサギを見つけてね、でも<span
                            class="onom"
                            >せかせか</span>とお話しながら言われたことにはあいそ笑いするばかりで、気づかずに前を通り過ぎて。そのあと続くのがハートのジャック、おしいだいたる<span
                            class="onom">ふわふわ</span>
                        <span class="onom">てかてか</span>まっ赤な台の上にはキングのかんむり、そしてこの大ねり歩きのとりをかざるのが、<span
                            class="emp.dash">ハートのキングとクイーンだ</span>。</p>
                    <p>アリスには、自分もその庭係３まいと同じようにひれふした方がいいのかちょっとはっきりしなかったけど、ねり歩きにそんな決まりがあるとも耳にしたこともなかったので、「それに、ねり歩きにいったい何のねうちがあって？」と思ってね、「ひれふして顔を下向きにしたら、どのみち見えないもの。」だからその場に立ったままじっとしていた。</p>
                    <p>ねり歩きはアリスのまん前まで来ると、そろって立ち止まって目を向けてくる、そこでクイーンが一言ぴしゃり、「こやつはだれよの。」たずね先はハートのジャック、だけど返ってくるのはおじぎと<span
                            class="onom">にこにこ</span>だけ。</p>
                    <p>「バカ者！」とクイーンは、頭をつーんとそらして、そのあとアリスの方をむいてさらにひとこと、「そこな子ども、名は何と言う？」</p>
                    <p>「あたくしの名前はアリスです、クイーンさま。」とアリスは<span class="onom"
                        >うやうや</span>しく受け答え、でも実は心のなかでは、「ふん、どうせただのトランプ１組。おそるるに足らずよ！」</p>
                    <p>「では<span class="emp.dash"
                        >あれは</span>何よの。」とクイーンが指さしたのは、バラの木のまわりにたおれている３まいの庭係、だってうつぶせになっていたし、背中のがらはどのトランプもおんなじだから、そこにいるのが庭係なのか、強者、そばづかえ、はたまた自分の子どもたちなのか、さっぱりでね。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">あたくし</span>に聞かないで。」と言うアリス、その気の強さに自分でもびっくり。「知った<span
                            class="emp.dash">こっちゃ</span>なくてよ。」</p>
                    <p>
                        <ruby> 怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>りで真っ赤になるクイーン、ちらっとにらみつけてから、やにわにけだものよろしくいきなり声をあらげて、「こやつの首をちょん切れ！　こやつの……」</p>
                    <p>「すっからかん！」とアリスが大声で言ってのけると、クイーンは静かに。</p>
                    <p>キングがその手をクイーンのうでに置いて、<span class="onom"
                        >おずおず</span>言い出す、「これお前、考え直さんか。ほんの子どもだ！」</p>
                    <p>クイーンはぷいっと顔をそむけて、ジャックに言いつける、「こやつらひっくり返せ！」</p>
                    <p>ジャックは、そうろっと片足でやってのけた。</p>
                    <p>「立てい！」とクイーンがきぃきぃ大声をあげると、３まいの庭係はたちまちとび起き、おじぎを始めてね、キングにクイーン、王子王女にみなみなさまへ。</p>
                    <p>「ええいやめい！」とかなきり声のクイーン、「目が回る。」とそこでバラの木の方を向いて続ける、「ここで<span class="emp.dash"
                            >今まで</span>何をしておった？」</p>
                    <p>「おそれながらクイーンさま。」とへりくだるふりして２は、しゃべるあいだ片ひざをついて、「なんとか３まいで――」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                            >もう</span>わかった！」と、そのあいだにバラをたしかめていたクイーンは、「こやつらの首をちょん切れ！」そしてねり歩きは動き出し、<ruby>
                            処 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しょ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>すための強者が３まい、あとに残されたので、追いつめられた庭係はアリスにかけよって助けを求める。</p>
                    <p>「打ち首なんかさせなくってよ！」って、アリスは３まいともを手近の大きな植木ばちにつっこんでね。だから３まいの強者は、ものの数分<span
                            class="onom">うろうろ</span>とさがしただけで、あとはみんなの後を追って<span class="onom"
                            >すたすたすた</span>。</p>
                    <p>「首はのうなったかえ？」とクイーンの大声。</p>
                    <p>「みな首なしにてございまする、クイーンさま！」と強者の返事も大声。</p>
                    <p>「よろしい！」とクイーンの大声、「そちはクローケーができるか？」</p>
                    <p>おしだまった強者ども、目を向ける先はアリス、つまりどうも、聞かれてるよってことみたいで。</p>
                    <p>「はいっ！」とアリスの大声。</p>
                    <p>「ならばこちへ！」と声をひびかせるクイーン、ねり歩きの仲間になったアリスは、これから何が始まるのか気になる気になる。</p>
                    <p>「これ――よいお日がらであるな！」とわきから<span class="onom"
                            >おずおず</span>ひと声。なんととなりを歩いていたのはあの白ウサギ、<span class="onom"
                        >こわごわ</span>顔をのぞかれていてね。</p>
                    <p>「本当に。」とアリス、「<ruby> 御前 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ごぜん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>さまはどちら？」</p>
                    <p>「しっ！　しーっ！」と<span class="onom">ひそひそ</span>早口で返すウサギ、話しているあいだも<span class="onom"
                            >そわそわ</span>後ろをふりかえりながら、やがてつま先立ちして小さく耳打ち、「御前さまは処けいを言いわたされておじゃる。」</p>
                    <p>「どうして？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「どうしてなかなかおいたわしやとな?!」と聞き返すウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「そうじゃなくて。」とアリス。「悲しいとかじゃなくて、わけを聞いてるの。」</p>
                    <p>「クイーンさまにびんたをはったのじゃよ――」と言い出すウサギ。アリスはぷぷっとふきだして。「これ、しーっ！」とウサギは<span class="onom"
                            >びくびく</span>
                        <span class="onom"
                        >ひそひそ</span>声。「クイーンさまに聞こえるでおじゃる！　ほれ、あの方がちょっとちこくされたもんで、クイーンさまがな――」</p>
                    <p>「ものども<ruby> 位置 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いち</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>につけい！」と大声をとどろかせるクイーン、一同はてんで<span class="onom"
                        >ばらばら</span>に走り出して、たがいにごっつんこ。けれどもものの数分で位置につきおわって、すぐに試合が始まったんだ。</p>
                    <p>アリスは思った、生まれてこのかたこんなへんてこなクローケー場見たことないって。そこらじゅうが凸凹で。玉は生きたハリネズミだし、ボールを打つつちは生きたフラミンゴ、それに強者どもが<span
                            class="onom">わざわざ</span>両手両足をついて身体を２つ折り、玉のくぐるところをつくってね。</p>
                    <p>なかでもいちばんむつかしいってアリスがまず気づいたのが、フラミンゴのあつかい。なんとかうまくそいつのどう体を、おさまりのいいよう、わきにおしこんで、足をぶらぶらさせてみたんだけど、たいていは、首をうまくまっすぐにして頭でハリネズミを打とうとしたとたん、そいつに身体をひねられ顔をのぞきこまれて<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >ね</span>、相手があまりにこまった顔をするもんだから、ぷっとふきだしちゃうしかなくって。それから頭を下向きにしてしきりなおしても、今度はハリネズミが丸まってくれずに<span
                            class="onom"
                        >ちょろちょろ</span>どっか行き出すもんだから、いらだたしいったらなくて。ましてやそれどころか、ハリネズミをどこへ転がしたいにしても、たいてい行く先には凸か凹、それに２つ折りの強者どもはしじゅう起き上がってべつのところへ歩いていっちゃうから、アリスもたちまち、この試合むつかしすぎると思うにいたる。</p>
                    <p>やってる人も自分の番を待たずにみんないっせいにやるし、ずーっと大声で言い合い、ハリネズミの取り合い。なのであっというまにクイーンは<ruby> 怒
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>りばくはつ、<span class="onom"
                        >どしんどしん</span>歩いていって、「あの男の首をちょん切れ！」とか「あの女の首をちょん切れ！」ってどなること１分に１回。</p>
                    <p>アリスはどうにも気もそぞろ、たしかにまだクイーンとは１度も口げんかしてなかったけど、いつ起こるともしれないから、「そうなったとき、」とアリスは考える、「あたくしの身はどうなるの？　このひとたち、ここにいるひとたちを打ち首にしたくてしたくて仕方ないみたい。こんな調子で、だれかひとりでも生き残れたものかしら！」</p>
                    <p>にげのびる手立てをさがしながら、すがたを見られずに立ち去れるのかしらと思っていたところ、気づけばお空のなかにぱっとへんてこなものが登場。はじめは何がなにやらわけがわからなかったけど、ものの数分もながめていると、そいつが<ruby>
                            愛想 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>あいそ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>だとわかってきたので、ひとりごと、「これはチェシアのネコね。やっと話し相手ができてよ。」</p>
                    <p>「うまくやってるかにゃ？」とネコは、話せるだけの口が出たとたんに言ってね。</p>
                    <p>アリスはお目々が出てくるまで待ってから、うなづく。「まだ話しかけてもむだ。」と思ってね、「あの子の耳が、せめて片方でも出てから。」１分もすると頭がまるまるあらわれたので、それからアリスは持ってたフラミンゴを下ろして、ゲームのことを<span
                            class="onom"
                        >かくかく</span>しかじか、聞いてくれる相手ができて、もううれしくってね。ネコはそれだけ見えればじゅうぶんと思ったらしく、そこから先は出てこない。</p>
                    <p>「あのひとたち、たぶんまともにゲームできていなくてよ。」と言い出すアリスの口ぶりはちょっぴり<ruby> 不満 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ふまん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>
                        <span class="onom"
                        >たらたら</span>でね、「それにみんなひどくさわぎ立てるものだから自分が何言ってるかもわからなくって――それにルールにちっともこだわらないみたいで。どうせあったとしても、だれも耳なんかかさないし――それにもうわけがわからないのが、何から何まで生き物だってこと。たとえば、次に通さなきゃいけないゲートがあっても、そいつはグラウンドのはしっこまでてくてく歩いて行っちゃうし――あたくしがクイーンさまのハリネズミに当て打ちしようとしたら、そいつはあたくしが来たのを目にしてにげていっちゃうんだもん！」</p>
                    <p>「クイーンはどうにゃい？」と小声のネコ。</p>
                    <p>「もうだめ。」とアリス、「だってめちゃくちゃ――」とちょうどそこでクイーンが背後で聞いているのに気がついて、言葉の先がこんなふうに、「――お強いんだもの、もうゲームなんてやってられないって気持ちね。」</p>
                    <p>クイーンはにっこりと笑って通りすぎる。</p>
                    <p>「だれと話して<span class="emp.dash"
                        >おる</span>？」とキングがアリスにお近づき、ものめずらしそうにネコの頭を見つめてね。</p>
                    <p>「お友だちの――チェシアのネコです。」とアリス。「どうぞよしなに。」</p>
                    <p>「<ruby> 面 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>つら</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>がまったく気に食わん。」とキング。「だがのぞみとあらば、わが手に口づけしてもよいぞ。」</p>
                    <p>「べーつにぃ。」と答えるネコ。</p>
                    <p>「こらえしょうのないやつめ、」とキング、「そのような目でわしを見おって！」と言いつつアリスの後ろにかくれてね。</p>
                    <p>「ネコでも王さまが見られる。」とアリス。「そう読んだ本にも書いてあってよ、でも何だったかしらん。」</p>
                    <p>「むう、やつを追いはらわねば。」と言い切ったキングは、そのとき通りがかったクイーンに声をかけて、「おまえ、あのネコを追っぱらってはくれまいか。」</p>
                    <p>クイーンは大小問わず、やっかいごとおさめるときにはこれしかない、「こやつの首をちょん切れ！」と、あたりに目をやることもなく言う。</p>
                    <p>「処けい人をじきじきに連れてこようぞ。」とやる気まんまんのキングは<span class="onom">いそいそ</span>その場を外す。</p>
                    <p>アリスは自分ももどってゲームのゆくえを見守った方がいいかなと思ったんだけど、そのあいだもクイーンの声が遠くから聞こえてね、心のままにさけんでいて。やってる人でも、もう３人が打つ順をまちがえたってことで処けいを言いわたされたのを耳にしていたし、自分としてもこんなありさま見てられないと思ってね、だってゲームは自分の番かどうかもわからないくらいしっちゃかめっちゃかなんだから。なのでとりあえず自分のハリネズミをさがしに。</p>
                    <p>ハリネズミはほかのハリネズミと取っ組み合いのけんかをしていて、今ならそのふたつをうまい具合に当て打ちできるとアリスは思ったんだけど、ただこまったことに、自分のフラミンゴが遠く庭のはしっこまで行ってしまっていてね、アリスの目には、そいつが木のひとつにとびうつろうと、むだなあがきをしているのが見えて。</p>
                    <p>つかまえたフラミンゴをかかえてもどってくるころには、けんかもお開き、ハリネズミは２ひきともすがたがなくってね。「もうどうでもよくてよ。」と思うアリス、「ゲートもみんなグラウンドのこっちがわにはいなくなってることだし。」そこでにがさないよう、そいつをわきにぎゅっとかかえて、お友だちともうちょっとお話でもと引き返していく。</p>
                    <p>チェシアのネコのところへもどると、びっくりしたのが気づけばまわりに人だかりができてたってこと。それになんと処けい人とキングとクイーンとのあいだでいざこざが起きていてね、いちどきにみんなしゃべるものだから、そのあいだその場にいるものはまったくおしだまるだけで、なんとも気まずそうで。</p>
                    <p>アリスがあらわれたとたん、その３人には助けの船みたいにうつったのか、その子に向かってそれぞれの言い分をくりかえすんだけど、やっぱりいちどきに言うものだから、だれが何を言ってるのかはっきり聞き取ろうにも本当にややこしくって。</p>
                    <p>処けい人の言い分は、切りはなす身体もないのに首は切れないということ、それからそんなことこれまでしたこともないし、<span
                            class="emp.dash">今さら</span>この年でやってみる気もないとのこと。</p>
                    <p>キングの言い分は、頭のあるものは打ち首にできるはず、たわけた話を言うなというもの。</p>
                    <p>クイーンの言い分は、今すぐさまただちに手が下されないのであれば、だれかれかまわずみな処すというもの。（この言葉が決め手となって、その場の一同どうにもみなざわざわ。）</p>
                    <p>アリスにはもうこう言うしかないと思えてね、「ネコのかい主は御前さまです。<span class="emp.dash"
                        >その方</span>にうかがうのがよろしいかと。」</p>
                    <p>「あやつはオリのなかじゃ。」とクイーンは処けい人に言ってね。「ここへ連れてこい。」すると処けい人はひょうふっと走り去る。</p>
                    <p>ネコの頭はそのとたんに消えだして、御前さまを連れてもどってきたときにはもう、まったくいなくなっていてね。そこでキングと処けい人はむやみやたらにそこらをさがしまわるんだけど、そのうちその場のみんなもゲームにもどっていっちゃった。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
