<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 9</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"/>Cultural<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu"/>Incorrect Word Usage<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense Words<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"/>Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow"/>Play on Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"/>Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>The Mock Turtle’s Story</h3>
                    <p>‘You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!’ said
                        the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s, and they
                        walked off together.</p>
                    <p>Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to
                        herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when
                        they met in the kitchen.</p>
                    <p>‘When <span class="emp">I’M</span> a Duchess,’ she said to herself, (not in a
                        very hopeful tone though), ‘I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen <span
                            class="emp">AT ALL</span>. Soup does very well without--Maybe it’s
                        always pepper that makes people <span class="pow">hot-tempered</span>,’ she
                        went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, ‘and
                        vinegar that makes them <span class="pow">sour</span>--and camomile that
                        makes them <span class="pow">bitter</span>--and--and barley-sugar and such
                        things that make children <span class="pow">sweet-tempered</span>. I only
                        wish people knew that: then they wouldn’t be so stingy about it, you
                        know--’</p>
                    <p>She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little startled
                        when she heard her voice close to her ear. ‘You’re thinking about something,
                        my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can’t tell you just now what
                        the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a bit.’</p>
                    <p>‘Perhaps it hasn’t one,’ Alice ventured to remark.</p>
                    <p>‘Tut, tut, child!’ said the Duchess. ‘Everything’s got a moral, if only you
                        can find it.’ And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as she
                        spoke.</p>
                    <p>Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the Duchess
                        was <span class="emp">VERY</span> ugly; and secondly, because she was
                        exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was
                        an uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
                        bore it as well as she could.</p>
                    <p>‘The game’s going on rather better now,’ she said, by way of keeping up the
                        conversation a little.</p>
                    <p>‘’Tis so,’ said the Duchess: ‘and the moral of that is--“Oh, ‘tis love, ‘tis
                        love, that makes the world go round!”’</p>
                    <p>‘Somebody said,’ Alice whispered, ‘that it’s done by everybody minding their
                        own business!’</p>
                    <p>‘Ah, well! It means much the same thing,’ said the Duchess, digging her sharp
                        little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, ‘and the moral of <span
                            class="emp">THAT</span> is--“Take care of the sense, and the sounds will
                        take care of themselves.”’</p>
                    <p>‘How fond she is of finding morals in things!’ Alice thought to herself.</p>
                    <p>‘I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,’ the
                        Duchess said after a pause: ‘the reason is, that I’m doubtful about the
                        temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">HE</span> might bite,’ Alice cautiously replied, not
                        feeling at all anxious to have the experiment tried.</p>
                    <p>‘Very true,’ said the Duchess: ‘<span class="pow">flamingoes and mustard both
                            bite</span>. And the moral of that is--“Birds of a feather flock
                        together.”’</p>
                    <p>‘Only mustard isn’t a bird,’ Alice remarked.</p>
                    <p>‘Right, as usual,’ said the Duchess: ‘what a clear way you have of putting
                        things!’</p>
                    <p>‘It’s a mineral, I <span class="emp">THINK</span>,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Of course it is,’ said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything
                        that Alice said; ‘there’s a large <span class="pow">mustard-mine</span> near
                        here. And the moral of that is--“The more there is of <span class="pow"
                            >mine</span>, the less there is of yours.”’</p>

                    <p>‘Oh, I know!’ exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,
                        ‘it’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like one, but it is.’</p>
                    <p>‘I quite agree with you,’ said the Duchess; ‘and the moral of that is--“Be
                        what you would seem to be”--or if you’d like it put more simply--“Never
                        imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others
                        that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had
                        been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.”’</p>
                    <p>‘I think I should understand that better,’ Alice said very politely, ‘if I
                        had it written down: but I can’t quite follow it as you say it.’</p>
                    <p>‘That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,’ the Duchess replied, in a
                        pleased tone.</p>
                    <p>‘Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, don’t talk about trouble!’ said the Duchess. ‘I make you a present of
                        everything I’ve said as yet.’</p>
                    <p>‘A cheap sort of present!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they don’t give birthday
                        presents like that!’ But she did not venture to say it out loud.</p>
                    <p>‘Thinking again?’ the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little
                        chin.</p>
                    <p>‘I’ve a right to think,’ said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a
                        little worried.</p>
                    <p>‘Just about as much right,’ said the Duchess, ‘as pigs have to fly; and the
                        m--’</p>
                    <p>But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away, even in
                        the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was linked into
                        hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in front
                        of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.</p>
                    <p>‘A fine day, your Majesty!’ the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.</p>
                    <p>‘Now, I give you fair warning,’ shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as
                        she spoke; ‘<span class="pow">either you or your head must be off</span>,
                        and that in about half no time! Take your choice!’</p>
                    <p>The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.</p>
                    <p>‘Let’s go on with the game,’ the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too much
                        frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
                        croquet-ground.</p>
                    <p>The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were resting
                        in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the
                        game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay would cost them their
                        lives.</p>
                    <p>All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with the
                        other players, and shouting ‘Off with his head!’ or ‘Off with her head!’
                        Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of
                        course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half
                        an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
                        King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
                        execution.</p>
                    <p>Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, ‘Have you
                        seen the Mock Turtle yet?’</p>
                    <p>‘No,’ said Alice. ‘I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.’</p>
                    <p>‘It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,’ said the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘I never saw one, or heard of one,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Come on, then,’ said the Queen, ‘and he shall tell you his history,’</p>
                    <p>As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to the
                        company generally, ‘You are all pardoned.’ ‘Come, <span class="emp"
                            >THAT’S</span> a good thing!’ she said to herself, for she had felt
                        quite unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.</p>
                    <p>They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (<span
                            class="emp">IF</span> you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the
                        picture.) ‘Up, lazy thing!’ said the Queen, ‘and take this young lady to see
                        the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
                        executions I have ordered’; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with the
                        Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole
                        she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that
                        savage Queen: so she waited.</p>
                    <p>The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till she
                        was out of sight: then it chuckled. ‘What fun!’ said the Gryphon, half to
                        itself, half to Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘What IS the fun?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Why, <span class="emp">SHE</span>,’ said the Gryphon. ‘It’s all her fancy,
                        that: they never executes nobody, you know. Come on!’</p>
                    <p>‘Everybody says “come on!” here,’ thought Alice, as she went slowly after it:
                        ‘I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!’</p>
                    <p>They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
                        sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer,
                        Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She pitied him
                        deeply. ‘What is his sorrow?’ she asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon
                        answered, very nearly in the same words as before, ‘It’s all his fancy,
                        that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!’</p>
                    <p>So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes full
                        of tears, but said nothing.</p>
                    <p>‘This here young lady,’ said the Gryphon, ‘she wants for to know your
                        history, she do.’</p>
                    <p>‘I’ll tell it her,’ said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: ‘sit down,
                        both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve finished.’</p>
                    <p>So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
                        herself, ‘I don’t see how he can <span class="emp">EVEN</span> finish, if he
                        doesn’t begin.’ But she waited patiently.</p>
                    <p>‘Once,’ said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, ‘I was a real
                        Turtle.’</p>
                    <p>These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
                        occasional exclamation of ‘Hjckrrh!’ from the Gryphon, and the constant
                        heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
                        saying, ‘Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,’ but she could not help
                        thinking there <span class="emp">MUST</span> be more to come, so she sat
                        still and said nothing.</p>
                    <p>‘When we were little,’ the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly, though
                        still sobbing a little now and then, ‘we went to school in the sea. The
                        master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--’</p>
                    <p>‘Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?’ Alice asked.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">We called him Tortoise because he taught us</span>,’ said
                        the Mock Turtle angrily: ‘really you are very dull!’</p>
                    <p>‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,’
                        added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor Alice,
                        who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to the Mock
                        Turtle, ‘Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all day about it!’ and he went on in
                        these words:</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it--’</p>
                    <p>‘I never said I didn’t!’ interrupted Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘You did,’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
                    <p>‘Hold your tongue!’ added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again. The
                        Mock Turtle went on.</p>
                    <p>‘We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">I’VE</span> been to a day-school, too,’ said Alice; ‘you
                        needn’t be so proud as all that.’</p>
                    <p>‘With extras?’ asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘we learned French and music.’</p>
                    <p>‘And washing?’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
                    <p>‘Certainly not!’ said Alice indignantly.</p>
                    <p>‘Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,’ said the Mock Turtle in a tone
                        of great relief. ‘Now at <span class="emp">OURS</span> they had at the end
                        of the bill, “French, music, <span class="emp">AND
                        WASHING</span>--extra.”’</p>
                    <p>‘You couldn’t have wanted it much,’ said Alice; ‘living at the bottom of the
                        sea.’</p>
                    <p>‘I couldn’t afford to learn it.’ said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. ‘I only
                        took the regular course.’</p>
                    <p>‘What was that?’ inquired Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">Reeling and Writhing,</span> of course, to begin with,’
                        the Mock Turtle replied; ‘and then <span class="pow">the different branches
                            of Arithmetic--Ambition, Distraction, <span class="ns"
                                >Uglification</span>, and Derision</span>.’</p>


                    <p>‘I never heard of “<span class="ns">Uglification</span>,”’ Alice ventured to
                        say. ‘What is it?’</p>
                    <p>The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. ‘What! Never heard of <span
                            class="ns">uglifying</span>!’ it exclaimed. ‘You know what to beautify
                        is, I suppose?’</p>
                    <p>‘Yes,’ said Alice doubtfully: ‘it means--to--make--anything--prettier.’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, then,’ the Gryphon went on, ‘if you don’t know what to <span
                            class="ns">uglify</span> is, you <span class="emp">ARE</span> a
                        simpleton.’</p>
                    <p>Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
                        turned to the Mock Turtle, and said ‘What else had you to learn?’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, there was <span class="pow">Mystery</span>,’ the Mock Turtle replied,
                        counting off the subjects on his flappers, ‘--<span class="pow">Mystery,
                            ancient and modern, with Seaography</span>: then <span class="pow"
                            >Drawling</span>--the <span class="pow">Drawling-master</span> was an
                        old conger-eel, that used to come once a week: <span class="emp">HE</span>
                        taught us <span class="pow">Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in
                            Coils</span>.’</p>
                    <p>‘What was <span class="emp">THAT</span> like?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Well, I can’t show it you myself,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘I’m too stiff. And
                        the Gryphon never learnt it.’</p>
                    <p>‘Hadn’t time,’ said the Gryphon: ‘I went to the Classics master, though. He
                        was an old crab, <span class="emp">HE</span> was.’</p>
                    <p>‘I never went to him,’ the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: ‘he taught <span
                            class="pow"> Laughing and Grief</span>, they used to say.’</p>

                    <p>‘So he did, so he did,’ said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
                        creatures hid their faces in their paws.</p>
                    <p>‘And how many hours a day did you do lessons?’ said Alice, in a hurry to
                        change the subject.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="cultural">Ten hours</span> the first day,’ said the Mock
                        Turtle: ‘<span class="cultural">nine</span> the next, and so on.’</p>
                    <p>‘What a curious plan!’ exclaimed Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘That’s the reason they’re called lessons,’ the Gryphon remarked: ‘because
                        they <span class="pow">lessen</span> from day to day.’</p>
                    <p>This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little before
                        she made her next remark. ‘Then the <span class="cultural">eleventh
                            day</span> must have been a holiday?’</p>
                    <p>‘Of course it was,’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
                    <p>‘And how did you manage on the <span class="cultural">twelfth</span>?’ Alice
                        went on eagerly.</p>
                    <p>‘That’s enough about lessons,’ the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
                        tone: ‘tell her something about the games now.’</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>ウミガメフーミのものがたり</h3>
                    <p>「うれしいこといかばかりか、また顔を合わせられるとは、なつかしいことよの。」と御前さまはなれなれしくアリスのわきにうでを通してきてね、ふたりは連れだって歩き出すことに。</p>
                    <p>アリスも御前さまのごきげんがよろしいとわかって、とてもほっとしてね、台所で会ったときあんなにつっけんどんだったのも、よもやコショウのせいかなとも思えてきたり。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">あたくし</span>が御前さまなら、」とひとりごと（とはいえ<ruby> 現実 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>げんじつ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>にはなれそうにもないけど）「コショウなんて台所に置かせないんだから、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >ひとつも</span>。なくてもスープはうまくできてよ。たぶんコショウのせいでいつもみんな<span class="onom">
                            <span class="pow">かっか</span>
                        </span>してるのね。」と、これは大発見とばかりにしたり顔、そのあと、「それから、おすのせいでみんな<span class="pow"
                            >しかめっ面</span>――カモミールのせいで<span class="pow"
                            >しぶい顔</span>――黒アメとかあああいうのがあれば子どもも<span class="pow">ほころび顔</span>。<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >そこのところ</span>みんなわかってくれたらいいのに。そうしたらみんなアメを出しおしみしないようになって、ほら――」</p>
                    <p>ここまで来ると御前さまのことなんかすっかりどわすれ、そこへその声が耳元で聞こえたものだから、ちょっとびくっとしちゃってね。「何か考えごとかえ、おまえさん、それでおしゃべりはおそろかと。そんなそちにぴったりの教えは、今はうまく出てこんが、まあそのうち思い出そうて。」</p>
                    <p>「たぶんそんなのなくてよ。」とアリスは思いきって口答え。</p>
                    <p>「ちっ、ちっ、子どもよの！」と御前さま。「何にでも教えは見いだせるものじゃ、気づきさえあればな。」とお話のあいだアリスに体を<span
                            class="onom">べたべた</span>くっつけてね。</p>
                    <p>相手が近すぎるのがアリスはあんまりうれしくなくってね、だってなにより御前さまのお顔は<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ほんとに</span>ぶさいくだし、それからアリスのかたの高さが、あごをのせるのにちょうどいいみたいで、しかもそのあごは気持ち悪いことにとがってると来た。とはいえ無礼なことはしたくなかったので、できるだけがまん。</p>
                    <p>「ゲームは今<span class="onom">そこそこ</span>うまく行ってるみたいね。」と、もうちょっと会話を続けてみる。</p>
                    <p>「うむ。」と御前さま。「そしてそこから学べる教えとは――『おお、それこそ愛、愛こそが世をうまくめぐらせる！』」</p>
                    <p>「どなたかによれば、」とつぶやくアリス、「それって、みんながひとにちょっかい出さなければの話じゃなくて？」</p>
                    <p>「おお、さよう！　つまりはまさしくそういうこと。」と言いつつ御前さまはアリスのかたに、とがったあごを<span class="onom"
                            >ぐりぐりぐり</span>、たたみかけるように「そして<span class="emp.dash"
                        >そこから</span>学べる教えとは――『意味が決まれば自ずから言の葉も決まる。』」</p>
                    <p>「何からでも教えに気づきたがるおひとってわけね。」とひとり思うアリス。</p>
                    <p>「みなまで言うな、そちはこう思うのじゃろ、わらわがどうしてこしに手を回さんかと。」とほざく御前さま、ちょっと間をあけて、「そのわけは、そちのフラミンゴがやにわにあばれんかとあやぶんでおるからじゃ。ためしてもよいかの？」</p>
                    <p>「たぶんかみついてよ。」と身がまえるアリス、そんなのたまったもんじゃないからね。</p>
                    <p>「それもそうじゃの。」と御前さま。「<span class="pow">フラミンゴもからしも、やられれば<span class="onom"
                                >ひりひり</span>する</span>。そこから学べる教えとは――『<ruby> 類 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>るい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>は友をよぶ。』」</p>
                    <p>「でも、からしは生き物じゃなくてよ。」とつっかかるアリス。</p>
                    <p>「うむ、ふつうはな。」と御前さま。「なんとはっきりものを言うやつじゃ！」</p>
                    <p>「なら石とか岩ね、<span class="emp.dash">たぶん</span>。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「むろんそうとも。」とほざく御前さまは、アリスの言うことなら何でもうなずいていくご様子。「ここほど近くの山にも、<span class="pow"
                            >からしがたくさんうまっておる</span>。そしてそこから学べる教えとは――『うまれば<span class="pow"
                        >うまる</span>ほどうまくなる。』」</p>
                    <p>「あ、わかった！」とさけぶアリス、相手の決めぜりふなんて聞いちゃいない。「<ruby> 野菜 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>やさい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ね、それっぽくはないけど、きっとそう。」</p>
                    <p>「そちの言うとおり。」と言い出す御前さま。「そしてそこから学べる教えとは――『そう見えるのならそうなのだ。』――すなわちさらにわかりよう言えば――『おのれのことを、ひとの目にうつるものとはちがうなどとは思わんこと、かつてそうであった、そうであったかもしれない、事実そうであったおのれとはちがうなどとは、それもまたひとの目にはちがってうつるのだから。』」</p>
                    <p>「たぶん、書き起こしたものがあれば、」とまじめに取り合うアリス、「もっとよくわかると思うんだけど。おっしゃってること、ちょっとついていけなくてよ。」</p>
                    <p>「こんなもの、ものは言いよう、大したことない。」と返す御前さまはごまんえつ。</p>
                    <p>「ならもうわざわざしていただかなくてけっこう！」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「そんなわざわざだなんて！」と御前さま。「これまでの言葉をみな、そちに進ぜよう。」</p>
                    <p>「やっすいおくりものね！」と思うアリス。「みんながたんじょう日プレゼントにこんなのくれなくてよかった！」でも思い切って声に出すことはできずじまい。</p>
                    <p>「また考えごとかえ？」とたずねてくる御前さまのとんがったあごがまたつきささる。</p>
                    <p>「あたくしだって考えごとしてしかるべきよ。」とつんつん言い出すアリス、だってちょっとわずらわしく思えてきたものだから。</p>
                    <p>「しかるべきじゃとも、」と御前さま、「ブタが空を飛ぶくらいには。そしてそこからま……」</p>
                    <p>ところがここで、アリスもほんとにびっくり、御前さまの声がとぎれてね、大好きな「学べる教え」という言葉を言いかけたところだったのに、組んでたうでもぶるぶるしだして。アリスが顔を上げると、なんとクイーンが自分たちの前に立ちはだかってうで組み、おまけに雷雨のごとくけわしいお顔。</p>
                    <p>「お日がらもよく、クイーンさま。」と切り出す御前さまの声はか細く小さい。</p>
                    <p>「よいか、よおく聞くがいい。」と大声のクイーン、話しているあいだもどんどん足ぶみ。「<span class="pow"
                            >この場からそなたがのうなるか首がのうなるか</span>、いずれがよい？　たった今よりすぐさまだ！　さあ決めろ！」</p>
                    <p>決めた御前さまは、ただちにいなくなった。</p>
                    <p>「さてゲームの続きよの。」とアリスに言うクイーン。アリスもこわくてこわくて何も言い出せなくて、とりあえずそうろっとうしろからついていってクローケー場に。</p>
                    <p>残ってやってたひとたちもみんな、クイーンがいないのをいいことに、かげで一休みをしていてね。ところがすがたが見えたもんだから、とたんにあわててゲームにもどる、クイーンはただ、少しでもおくれたら、きさまらの命はないぞと言うばかり。</p>
                    <p>みんながやってるあいだも、ずっとクイーンはやってるひとたちみんなとの口げんかをやめなくて、「あの男の首をちょん切れ！」とか「あの女の首をちょん切れ！」ってわめくばっかり。言いわたされたやつはみんな、強者にしょっぴかれていくから、そうなるともちろん玉くぐらせの役ができなくなるわけで、そんなこんなで３０分かそこらもたつと、残ったのはキングとクイーンとアリスだけで、あとはみんな処けいを言いわたされてしょっぴかれてしまった。</p>
                    <p>そこでクイーンも手をとめて、ぜえはあ言いながら、アリスに一言、「そちはもうウミガメフーミに会うたか？」</p>
                    <p>「いいえ。」とアリス。「そもそもウミガメフーミが何だかぞんじませんし。」</p>
                    <p>「ウミガメフーミスープのもとになるものよの。」とクイーン。</p>
                    <p>「そんなの見たことも聞いたこともなくてよ。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「ならばこちへ。」とクイーン、「さすれば本人がいわれを教えてくれよう。」</p>
                    <p>いっしょになってそこをはなれるとき、アリスの耳へ、キングがその場のみんなにかける声がかすかに、「このたびはみな大目に見る」って。「はあ、<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >ほっ</span>としてよ！」とひとりごと、だってクイーンが処けいをたくさん言いつけてかなり気を落としていたからね。</p>
                    <p>まもなく行き当たったのが１ぴきのグリフォン、日なたで<span class="onom"
                            >すやすや</span>ねていてね（グリフォンがどんなのか知らないなら、さし絵をごらん。）「起きよ、なまけもの！」とクイーン、「この<ruby>
                            姫君 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひめぎみ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>をウミガメフーミのところへあないして、いわれを聞かせてやれい。わらわはもどって、言いつけておいた処けいを見とどけねばならん。」とはなれていって、ひとり残されたアリスとグリフォン。アリスはこの生き物のつらがまえがそこまで気に入ったわけではないんだけど、考え合わせてみると、そいつとここにいても、あのぷんすかクイーンについていくのも、どっちでもあぶないのはどうも変わりなさそうだから、じっとしてたんだ。</p>
                    <p>身体を起こしたグリフォンが目をこすって、そのあと見えなくなるまでクイーンを<span class="onom"
                        >まじまじ</span>。そのあとふくみ笑い。「けっさくでい！」とグリフォンは、ひとりごと半分でアリスに言う。</p>
                    <p>「けっさく<span class="emp.dash">って</span>、何が？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >あの女さ</span>。」とグリフォン。「みんなあいつの思いこみでい、だれひとり処けいなんてされねえってことよ。こっちだ！」</p>
                    <p>「ここの方々『こっちだ』ばっかり。」と思いつつもアリスはそいつにゆっくりついていく。「生まれてこのかた、そんなふうに言いつけられたこと、なくてよ、なくってよ！」</p>
                    <p>歩いてほどなく遠くに見えてくるウミガメフーミ、いわおの小さなでっぱりに、ひとり悲しそうにこしかけていてね、近づくにつれ聞こえてくるそのため息、まるでむねがはりさけたみたい。だから心からかわいそうになって、「何が悲しくって？」とグリフォンにたずねたんだけど、グリフォンの答えは、さっきのとほとんど同じような言葉でね、「みんなあいつの思いこみでい、悲しいことなんてべつにありゃしねえ。こっちだ！」</p>
                    <p>で、ウミガメフーミのところまでたどりつくと、大きな目をうるうるさせて見てくるわりに、ものも言わない。</p>
                    <p>「こちらの<ruby> 姫君 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひめぎみ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が、」とグリフォン、「おめえのいわれを知りてえんだとさ。」</p>
                    <p>「そちらに申します。」とウミガメフーミは、消え入りそうな声で、「おふたかたとも、おすわりくだせえ、しまいまでどうかお静かに。」</p>
                    <p>というわけで、こしを下ろして、しばしのあいだ一同だんまり。そこでアリスは考えごと、「始まらないなら、おしまいも何も<span
                            class="emp.dash">ない</span>んじゃなくて？」でもじっとこらえる。</p>
                    <p>「昔は、」とついに口を開くウミガメフーミ、ふかいため息ついて、「あっしもまっとうなウミガメでした。」</p>
                    <p>そう切り出したあと長い長い間があってね、ときどきグリフォンの「ひっくるぅー」というおたけびがはさまったり、ひっきりなしウミガメフーミの<span
                            class="onom"
                            >さめざめ</span>という泣き声が聞こえたりするくらいで。アリスは立ち上がって「面白いお話ご苦労さま。」と言い捨てそうになるところだったけど、きっと何かある<span
                            class="emp.dash">はず</span>とどうしても思えるのもあって、すわったままだまっていたんだ。</p>
                    <p>「まだ小せえころは、」とウミガメフーミはおもむろに続きを話し出してね、たびたびまだしゃくり上げたりしながら、「海の学びやに通うたもんで。先生はウミガメのじいさんで――あっしらはよくスッポンと呼んどり……」</p>
                    <p>「どうしてそんなあだ名になって？　ほんとはちがうのに。」と口をはさむアリス。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">まっさらな本は<ruby> 素本 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>すほん</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>と言うだろ</span>。」とウミガメフーミはぷんすか、「あんたほんとににぶいむすめだ！」</p>
                    <p>「てめえそんな当たりめえのこと聞いてはずかしくねえのか？」とグリフォンが追いうち、そのあとはふたりとももの言わずすわったまま、かわいそうなやつと目を向けてくるので、アリスは穴があったら入りたい気持ちになってきて。やがてグリフォンがウミガメフーミに声をかけてね、「続けろい、こんにゃろ！　日がくれちまう！」するとウミガメフーミはこう言葉をついでいく――</p>
                    <p>「で、あっしらは海の<ruby> 学舎 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>がくしゃ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>に通うとりました、あんたは信じられんかもしれねえが……」</p>
                    <p>「できないって言うの？」と口をはさむアリス。</p>
                    <p>「ああ。」とウミガメフーミ。</p>
                    <p>「じゃかあしい！」とかぶせるグリフォン。</p>
                    <p>「とにかく一等の学舎でした――そのはずで、あっしら週日、学校行ってたんですぜ……」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">あたくし</span>だって『週日学校』に通ってよ。」とアリス。「そんなのでじまんするつもり？」</p>
                    <p>「<ruby> 選択 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>せんたく</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>はどうだ？」とたずねるウミガメフーミはちょっぴり<span class="onom">そわそわ</span>。</p>
                    <p>「もちろん、」とアリス、「受けてよ、フランス語に音楽。」</p>
                    <p>「洗い物はしねえのかい？」とウミガメフーミ。</p>
                    <p>「するわけないじゃない！」とアリスはぷんすか。</p>
                    <p>「おお！　ならあんたんとこは、ええ学舎じゃねえんで。」とウミガメフーミの口ぶりはたいへんほっとしたようで。「あっしらんとこじゃ、<ruby> 勘定
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かんじょう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>の最後にフランス語と音楽と<span class="emp.dash">洗い物</span>は『せんたく』てえあったな。」</p>
                    <p>「べつに必要ないことなくて。」とアリス。「海の底でくらしてるんだもの。」</p>
                    <p>「まあ、あっしは習うゆとりがなかったもんで。」とウミガメフーミはため息。「普通の科目だけでやした。」</p>
                    <p>「何があるの？」とくいつくアリス。</p>
                    <p>「そりゃあ、<span class="pow">より方にまき方</span>から始めまして、」と答えるウミガメフーミ、「それから<span
                            class="pow">算数を一通りやりまして――わたし算にひっきり算、<span class="ns"
                            >ばけ算</span>にわらい算</span>。」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="ns">ばけ算</span>だなんて初耳。」と思い切って口に出すアリス。「何それ。」</p>
                    <p>グリフォンはびっくり、前足をふたつとも高く上げて、「<span class="ns">化け物</span>ってな知らねえか！」とさけんでね。「<ruby>
                            化粧 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>けしょう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ってのはわかるだろ、ああ？」</p>
                    <p>「ええ、」と言うアリスは自信なさげ、「それって――あの――きれいに――化ける――ことでしょ。」</p>
                    <p>「それで、」と引き取るグリフォン、「<span class="ns">化け物</span>のことを知らねえたあ、<span
                            class="emp.dash">てめえ</span>アホウよ。」</p>
                    <p>しょげてしまったアリス、そこからまた何かをたずねる気にもならなくてね、だからウミガメフーミの方を向いて言ったんだ。「ほかに何のお勉強したの？」</p>
                    <p>「へえ、<span class="pow">からっきし</span>を。」と答えるウミガメフーミはひれでひとつずつ科目を数えていってね――「<span
                            class="pow">からっきし、こりゃあ昔のも今のもで、それにとばっちり</span>。あとは<span class="pow"
                                >ヨガ<ruby> 倒錯 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>とうさく</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>
                        </span>――<span class="pow">ヨガの先生</span>はアナゴの<span class="emp.dash"
                            >じいさん</span>で、週１でありやす。<span class="pow">ヨガの体操で<span class="onom"
                                >ぐるぐる</span>こんがらがって、わけわかんなくなりやす</span>。」</p>
                    <p>「それって<span class="emp.dash">どう</span>やるわけ？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「いや、あっしにゃあとてもとても。」とウミガメフーミ。「身体がかたくて。それにグリフォンのだんなも知りやせんし。」</p>
                    <p>「ひまがねえもんでな。」とグリフォン。「まあ古文の先生にはついたさ。カニの<span class="emp.dash"
                        >じいさん</span>よ、そいつは。」</p>
                    <p>「あっしは行っとりませんが。」とウミガメフーミはため息。「何でも<span class="pow"
                        >昔の笑ってん語と歯ぎしりや語</span>を教えなさるとか。」</p>
                    <p>「そうよ、そうともよ。」と今度はグリフォンもため息。そして２ひきの生き物はその前足で顔をおおってね。</p>
                    <p>「で、１日に何時間くらいあるわけ？」とアリスはあわてて話を切りかえる。</p>
                    <p>「１日目は<span class="cultural">８時間</span>、」とウミガメフーミ、「次の日は<span class="cultural"
                            >４時間</span>と続いていくんで。」</p>
                    <p>「すっごくへんてこりん！」と思わず声に出すアリス。</p>
                    <p>「そこはそら<ruby> 時間割 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>じかんわり</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>て言うだろう？」と言い出すグリフォン、「日ごと半分に<span class="pow">割られていく</span>んよ。」</p>
                    <p>これはアリスには思いもよらないことだったので、ちょっと考えてみてから次にはこんなことを言い出してね。「じゃあ割り切れなくなった<span
                            class="cultural">５日目</span>はお休み？」</p>
                    <p>「その通りでごぜえやす。」</p>
                    <p>「でもそれじゃ<span class="cultural">６日目</span>はどうするの？」と<span class="onom"
                            >わくわく</span>しながら続けるアリス。</p>
                    <p>「時間割の話あもういい。」とグリフォンがばっさり割りこんでね。「さあ、この子におゆうぎでも教えてやろうや。」</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
