<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <title>Texts</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 2</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>The Pool of Tears</h3>
                    <p>‘<span class="ns">Curiouser</span> and <span class="ns">curiouser</span>!’
                        cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot
                        how to speak good English); ‘now I’m opening out like the largest telescope
                        that ever was! Good-bye, feet!’ (for when she looked down at her feet, they
                        seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). ‘Oh, my
                        poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you
                        now, dears? I’m sure <span class="emp">I</span> shan’t be able! I shall be a
                        great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best
                        way you can;--but I must be kind to them,’ thought Alice, ‘or perhaps they
                        won’t walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of
                        boots every Christmas.’</p>
                    <p>And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. ‘They must go by
                        the carrier,’ she thought; ‘and how funny it’ll seem, sending presents to
                        one’s own feet! And how odd the directions will look! ALICE’S RIGHT FOOT,
                        ESQ. HEARTHRUG, NEAR THE FENDER, (WITH ALICE’S LOVE). Oh dear, what nonsense
                        I’m talking!’</p>
                    <p>Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now
                        more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and
                        hurried off to the garden door.</p>
                    <p>Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look
                        through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless
                        than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.</p>
                    <p>‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself,’ said Alice, ‘a great girl like you,’
                        (she might well say this), ‘to go on crying in this way! Stop this moment, I
                        tell you!’ But she went on all the same, shedding <span class="cultural"
                            >gallons</span> of tears, until there was a large pool all round her,
                        about <span class="cultural">four inches</span> deep and reaching half down
                        the hall.</p>
                    <p>After a time she heard a little <span class="onom">pattering</span> of feet
                        in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It
                        was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of <span
                            class="cultural">white kid gloves</span> in one hand and a large fan in
                        the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as
                        he came, ‘Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won’t she be savage if I’ve kept
                        her waiting!’ Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any
                        one; so, when the Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice,
                        ‘If you please, sir--’ The Rabbit started violently, dropped the <span
                            class="cultural">white kid gloves</span> and the fan, and skurried away
                        into the darkness as hard as he could go.</p>
                    <p>Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept
                        fanning herself all the time she went on talking: ‘Dear, dear! How queer
                        everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual. I wonder
                        if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got
                        up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a little different.
                        But if I’m not the same, the next question is, Who in the world am I? Ah,
                            <span class="emp">THAT’S</span> the great puzzle!’ And she began
                        thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as
                        herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.</p>
                    <p>‘I’m sure I’m not Ada,’ she said, ‘for her hair goes in such long ringlets,
                        and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and I’m sure I can’t be Mabel, for I
                        know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a very little!
                        Besides, <span class="emp">SHE’S</span> she, and I’m I, and--oh dear, how
                        puzzling it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me
                        see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four
                        times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate! However,
                        the Multiplication Table doesn’t signify: let’s try Geography. <span
                            class="cultural">London is the capital of Paris</span>, and <span
                            class="cultural">Paris is the capital of Rome</span>, and <span
                            class="cultural">Rome</span>--no, <span class="emp">THAT’S</span> all
                        wrong, I’m certain! I must have been changed for Mabel! I’ll try and say
                            “<span class="cultural">How doth the little--</span>“’ and she crossed
                        her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,
                        but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the
                        same as they used to do:--</p>

                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp002"> ‘How doth the little crocodile<br />
                                <span class="emp">Improve</span> his shining tail,<br /> And pour
                                the waters of the Nile<br /> On every golden scale! </span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp003"> ‘How cheerfully he seems to grin,<br /> How neatly
                                spread his claws,<br /> And welcome little fishes in<br />
                                <span class="emp">With</span> gently smiling jaws!’ </span>
                        </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>‘I’m sure those are not the right words,’ said poor Alice, and her eyes
                        filled with tears again as she went on, ‘I must be Mabel after all, and I
                        shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no
                        toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve made up
                        my mind about it; if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be no use their
                        putting their heads down and saying “Come up again, dear!” I shall only look
                        up and say “Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then, if I like being
                        that person, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down here till I’m somebody
                        else”--but, oh dear!’ cried Alice, with a sudden burst of tears, ‘I do wish
                        they <span class="emp">WOULD</span> put their heads down! I am so <span
                            class="emp">VERY</span> tired of being all alone here!’</p>
                    <p>As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that
                        she had put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves while she was
                        talking. ‘How <span class="emp">CAN</span> I have done that?’ she thought.
                        ‘I must be growing small again.’ She got up and went to the table to measure
                        herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
                        about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out
                        that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
                        hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.</p>
                    <p>‘That <span class="emp">WAS</span> a narrow escape!’ said Alice, a good deal
                        frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
                        existence; ‘and now for the garden!’ and she ran with all speed back to the
                        little door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little
                        golden key was lying on the glass table as before, ‘and things are worse
                        than ever,’ thought the poor child, ‘for I never was so small as this
                        before, never! And I declare it’s too bad, that it is!’</p>
                    <p>As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash! she
                        was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had somehow
                        fallen into the sea, ‘and in that case I can go back by railway,’ she said
                        to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to
                        the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you
                        find a number of <span class="cultural">bathing machines</span> in the sea,
                        some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging
                        houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon made out that
                        she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was <span
                            class="cultural">nine feet</span> high.</p>
                    <p>‘I wish I hadn’t cried so much!’ said Alice, as she swam about, trying to
                        find her way out. ‘I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by being
                        drowned in my own tears! That <span class="emp">WILL</span> be a queer
                        thing, to be sure! However, everything is queer to-day.’</p>
                    <p>Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off,
                        and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be
                        a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and
                        she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like
                        herself.</p>
                    <p>‘Would it be of any use, now,’ thought Alice, ‘to speak to this mouse?
                        Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very likely
                        it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.’ So she began: ‘O
                        Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired of swimming
                        about here, O Mouse!’ (Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking
                        to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered
                        having seen in her brother’s <span class="cultural">Latin Grammar</span>, ‘A
                        mouse--of a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!’) The Mouse looked at her
                        rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
                        but it said nothing.</p>
                    <p>‘Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,’ thought Alice; ‘I daresay it’s a
                            <span class="cultural">French</span> mouse, come over with <span
                            class="cultural">William the Conqueror</span>.’ (For, with all her
                        knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything
                        had happened.) So she began again: <span class="lang-french">‘Ou est ma
                            chatte?’</span> which was the first sentence in her French lesson-book.
                        The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over
                        with fright. ‘Oh, I beg your pardon!’ cried Alice hastily, afraid that she
                        had hurt the poor animal’s feelings. ‘I quite forgot you didn’t like
                        cats.’</p>

                    <p>‘Not like cats!’ cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. ‘Would <span
                            class="emp">YOU</span> like cats if you were me?’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, perhaps not,’ said Alice in a soothing tone: ‘don’t be angry about it.
                        And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you’d take a fancy to
                        cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing,’ Alice went
                        on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, ‘and she sits
                        purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and
                        she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she’s such a capital one for
                        catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!’ cried Alice again, for this time the
                        Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really
                        offended. ‘We won’t talk about her any more if you’d rather not.’</p>
                    <p>‘We indeed!’ cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail.
                        ‘As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always <span class="emp"
                            >HATED</span> cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t let me hear the
                        name again!’</p>
                    <p>‘I won’t indeed!’ said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
                        conversation. ‘Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?’ The Mouse did not
                        answer, so Alice went on eagerly: ‘There is such a nice little dog near our
                        house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed <span class="cultural"
                            >terrier</span>, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And
                        it’ll fetch things when you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its
                        dinner, and all sorts of things--I can’t remember half of them--and it
                        belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth <span
                            class="cultural">a hundred pounds</span>! He says it kills all the rats
                        and--oh dear!’ cried Alice in a sorrowful tone, ‘I’m afraid I’ve offended it
                        again!’ For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
                        making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.</p>
                    <p>So she called softly after it, ‘Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we won’t
                        talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!’ When the Mouse
                        heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite
                        pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice,
                        ‘Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my history, and you’ll
                        understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.’</p>
                    <p>It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds
                        and animals that had fallen into it: there were a <span class="cultural"
                            >Duck</span> and a <span class="cultural">Dodo</span>, a <span
                            class="cultural">Lory</span> and an <span class="cultural"
                        >Eaglet</span>, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and
                        the whole party swam to the shore.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>なみだまり</h3>
                    <p>「<span class="ns">てんへこりん</span>、<span class="ns"
                            >てんへこりん</span>！」と声をあげるアリス（もうびっくりのあまり、<ruby> 一時 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いっとき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ちゃんとした言葉づかいをどわすれしてね）。「今度は身体が広げられてる、世界最大の望遠鏡をのばしてるみたい！　ごきげんよう、あんよちゃん！」（だって足元を見下ろすと、どんどん遠ざかって、ほとんど見えなくなりそうで。）「ああ、おいたわしや、あんよちゃん、こうなったらどなたにくつやくつ下をはかせてもらおうかしら、ねえ？　ぜったいあたくしには無理だからっ！　あんまりにもはなれすぎて、こっちからめんどう見切れなくてよ。できるだけご自分で何とかなさることね――でも気づかいはしてあげないと。」とアリスは思って、「でないと行きたい方に歩いてくれないかも！　そうね、クリスマスごとに新しいブーツをさし上げてよ。」</p>

                    <p>頭のなかであれこれ、どうしようかとめぐらせ続けてね。「ひとに運んでもらわないと。」と考えて、「って、もうふきだしそう、自分のあんよにプレゼントだなんて！　あて名だっておかしなものになってよ
                            <span class="emp.dash">だんろ前の</span>
                        <span class="emp.dash">しきものにお住まいの</span> 　 <span class="emp.dash"
                            >アリスの右足さまへ</span> 　　　 <span class="emp.dash">アリスから<ruby> 愛 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>あい</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>をこめて</span> まったく！　あたくしの話もすっからかんね！」</p>
                    <p>ちょうどそこで、頭が広間の天井にごつん。なんとただいま背たけは<span class="cultural"
                        >２メートル７５</span>をややこえたあたり、たちまちちっちゃな金の鍵を取り上げて、お庭のドアへあわてて向かう。</p>
                    <p>ふびんなアリス！　がんばってもできるのは、横向きにねそべって片目でお庭をのぞくだけ、向こうへ行く望みなんて、これまで以上にありえない。へたりこんでまた大泣きのはじまり。</p>
                    <p>「あなた<ruby> 恥 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>はじ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>をお知りなさい。」とアリス。「あなたみたいな気高い娘が」（たしかにお高い）「こんな泣きに泣いて！　ただちにおやめ、いいこと！」けれどもやっぱりそのまま、流すなみだはたっぷり<ruby>
                            大量 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>たいりょう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、しまいにぐるりと大きな池になって、深さおよそ<span class="cultural"
                        >１０センチ</span>、広間も半分ひたってしまう。</p>
                    <p>しばらくして聞こえてくる遠くの<span class="onom"
                            >ぱたぱた</span>という足音、あわててなみだをぬぐって近づくものに目をやると、そう、あの白ウサギがまた帰ってきたんだ、おめかしして、<span
                            class="cultural"
                            >白ヤギの手ぶくろ</span>を片手に、大きなせんすをもう片手に持っていてね。大わらわでどたばたやってきて、ぶつぶつ言いながらこっちへ来るんだ。「およよ！　<ruby>
                            御前 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ごぜん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>さま、御前さま！　およよ！　お待ちさせたらかんかん、そんなのいやでおじゃる！」まさにアリスはすがる思いで、だれか助けてと言いたいところだったから、近くを通りがかったウサギに<span
                            class="onom"
                        >おずおず</span>と弱々しげに声をかけてみる。「もし、よろしくて――」びくっとしたウサギは、はたと白手ぶくろとせんすを落として、全速力でぴゅーっと暗がりに消え去っちゃった。</p>
                    <p>せんすと手ぶくろを拾い上げたアリス、その部屋が暑苦しいので、ずーっと自分をあおぎながらひとりごとの続き――「もう、もう！　今日はけったいなことばかり！　でも昨日はずっといつも通りだったのに。もしや夜中のうちにあたくしの身に何か。待って。今朝起きたときのあたくしは<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >ちゃんと</span>あたくし？　どうも少しちがっていた気がしないでもなくてよ。でもあたくしでないのなら気になるのは、『今のあたくしはいったいどなた』ってこと。んもう、<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >まったく</span>ややこしい！」そこで同い年の知り合いの子のことをみんな思いうかべていって、自分がそのうちのだれかになっていないかたしかめたんだ。</p>
                    <p>「あたくしがエイダでないことはたしかね。」とつぶやく。「だってあの子の<ruby> 髪 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かみ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>はあんなに長いまき毛、あたくしはちっともまきがなくてよ――それときっとメイベルでもないはず、だってあたくしは物知りっていうのに、あの子、ふん！　知らないにもほどがあってよ！　それに<span
                            class="emp.dash">あの子</span>はあの子、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >あたくし</span>はあたくし、だから――ああ、もう！　なんてややこしいの！　どうかしら、ちゃんと覚えてたこと覚えてる？　ええと４×５＝１２、４×６＝１３、４×７――ああ、もう！　そんな調子じゃいつまでも２０にならなくてよ！　とはいえ九九なんて大したことないんだから。地理を試すの。<span
                            class="cultural">ロンドンはパリの<ruby> 都 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>みやこ</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>
                        </span>、<span class="cultural">パリはローマの都</span>、それから<span class="cultural"
                            >ローマ</span>は――ちがう、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >そんなの</span>まちがいに決まってる！　メイベルになっちゃったにちがいなくてよ！　だったら<span class="cultural"
                            >『がんばるぞミツバチ』</span>のお歌はどう？」そこでおけいこごとみたく、ひざ前に手を重ねて、そらんじてみたんだけど、声が<span
                            class="onom">がらがら</span>でとっぴで、それに歌詞かしもいつも通りでなくって。</p>

                    <div class="song">
                        <p> びっくりだ　わあにさん<br /> しっぽがね　ぴかーん<br /> ナイルがわ　ざあぶざぶ<br /> うろこにね　びしゃーん！ </p>
                        <p> キバだして　にいんやり<br /> ツメひろげ　じゃきーん<br /> おいでませ　さかなちゃん<br /> にこにこ……がぶりっ！ </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>「ぜんぜん歌詞がちがってよ。」とかわいそうにアリスはまた目になみだをいっぱいにためながら、言葉を続けた。「やっぱりあたくしメイベルにちがいないのね、だったらあたくしあのせせこましい小屋にうつり住まなきゃいけないことになって、しかも遊ぶおもちゃもろくにないの、うわあん！　お勉強も山もりよ！　いやあ！　あたくし心に決めた、あたくしがメイベルなら、ここでじっとしててやるんだから！　どなたかがのぞいて『お上がりなさい！』なんて言ってもむだなんだから！　あたくし上目で申しあげてよ、『ところであたくし何者？　まずそれにお答えになって。それから、それがあたくしのなりたい方なら上がりますけど、ちがうようでしたらほかのどなたかになるまで、ここでじっとしております。』――でも、ああもう！」とアリスはいきなりわっと泣き出して、「そののぞいてくれるどなたかが、<span
                            class="emp.dash">いてくださったら</span>どんなにいいか！　もう<span class="emp.dash"
                            >もう</span>うんざりよ、こんなところでひとりぼっちだなんて！」</p>
                    <p>こう言いつつ自分の手に目を落としてみるとびっくり、見るとしゃべっているあいだにウサギさんの白手ぶくろをはめていたんだ。「どうしてこんなことが<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >できて</span>るの？」と思ってね、「また小さくなってるにちがいないわ。」起きあがってテーブルまで行ってそれで背たけをはかってみると、だいたいしかわからないながらも、今はおよそ<span
                            class="cultural"
                        >６０センチ</span>で、大いそぎでちぢみつつあってね。わけはすぐにわかった、持っているせんすのせいなんだ。あわてて手放すと、まさにそのときからちぢみはすっかりおさまって。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >まったく</span>、命からがらね！」と言うアリスはいきなり変わったことにびくびくものだったんだけど、自分がまだちゃんとあるってわかってほっとしてね。「さて今こそお庭よ！」といちもくさんにあの小さなドアへもどったんだけど、なのに、ああ！　小さなドアはまたしまっていて、ちっちゃな金の鍵も前と同じでガラスのテーブルの上、だから「もう今までで最悪」とかわいそうにその子は思うしかない。「だってこんなちっちゃくなったの初めてなのよ、初めて！　正直ひどすぎてよ、ひどすぎ！」</p>
                    <p>と口に出したとたん、足をすべらせ、たちまちぼちゃん！　しょっぱい水に首までつかって。初めのうちは海か何かに落ちたと思ってね。「たしかこういう場合は、線路から引き返せばよくてよ。」とひとりごと。（アリスは生まれてこのかた１度だけ海辺に行ったことがあったから、ふつうにこう考えたんだ。イギリスでは海に行くと、かならず砂はまにたくさん<span
                            class="cultural">
                            <ruby> 車輪 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>しゃりん</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>のついた箱がたの着がえ部屋があって</span>ね、子どもたちは木のくま手で砂をほじっていて、あとはずらり海の家にその後ろが線路の駅。）でもすぐにはっとした、いるのは自分が<span
                            class="cultural">３メートル</span>近いときに泣いて作ったなみだまりなんだって。</p>
                    <p>「あんなに泣くんじゃなかった！」と言いながらアリスは水をかいて前に進もうとしてね。「<ruby> 罰 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ばち</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が当たろうとしてるのよきっと、自分のなみだでおぼれろってね！　<span class="emp.dash"
                        >そんなの</span>けったいだわ、ぜったい！　それにしても今日はけったいなことばっかり。」</p>
                    <p>ふとそのときすぐそばあたりで何かがばしゃんと池に落ちる音、水をかいて近くで見きわめようとする。とりあえずセイウチかカバかと思ったものの、今の自分がとっても小さいことを思い出して、たちまちはっとした、ただのハツカネズミが自分と同じようにすべり落ちただけだって。</p>
                    <p>「このネズミに声をかけて、」とアリスは考えごと。「何かになって？　ここへ落ちてきてからというもの、もうとんでもないことだらけなんだから、どうもあれも話せそうな気がしてよ。とりあえずだめもとでやってみようかしら。」で、やってみた。「そこなネズミよ、ごぞんじ？　この池の出口。このあたりを泳ぎまわって<span
                            class="onom"
                            >へとへと</span>なの、そこなネズミよ！」（アリスにはネズミにちゃんと正しく呼びかけなきゃいけないという頭があったので、１度もそんなことしたことなかったけど、そういえばお兄さんの<span
                            class="cultural"
                        >古文の学習帳</span>にあってね、『ネズミが――ネズミの――ネズミに――ネズミを――ネズミよ！』って。）そのネズミはどこか問いたげにその子を見つめて、小さなひとみで目くばせしてくれたみたいなんだけど、一言もなくって。</p>
                    <p>「こっちの言葉がわからないのかも。」とアリスは考えごと。「たぶん外国ネズミなのね、ウィリアムせいふく王についてわたってきた。」（その子の知ってるかぎりでは、何年前に何が起こったのかはうろ覚えだから、こんなことに。）で、またやってみる。<span
                            class="lang" id="chinese">「<ruby> 吾猫兮何在 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>わがねこいずくにかある</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>？」</span>これは<span class="cultural"
                            >外国語</span>のドリルにある初めの文。ネズミは水からいきなりとび出し、そりゃもう<span class="onom"
                            >びくびく</span>とふるえだしてね。「あら、ごめんあそばせ！」あわてて声を上げるアリス、このあわれな動物の気をそこねたかと気がかりで。「ネコお好きでないことうっかりしててよ！」</p>

                    <p>「お好きでねえよ！」とネズミのかん高く気持ちのこもった声。「こっちの身になりゃ<span class="emp.dash"
                        >わかん</span>だろ！」</p>
                    <p>「ええ、おっしゃる通りね。」とアリスの声は相手をなだめるよう。「そうお<ruby> 怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>りにならないで。でもうちのネコのダイナに引き合わせられたらなあ、あの子をひと目見たならきっとネコさんのこともお気にめしてよ。かわいくておとなしいんだから。」と続けるアリスはひとりごと半分で、池をゆったりとお泳ぎに。「でね、だんろのそばにすわって、すてきにのどを鳴らして、お手々を<span
                            class="onom">ぺろぺろ</span>顔を<span class="onom">ごしごし</span>――だっこするとほんと<span
                            class="onom"
                            >ふわふわ</span>なんだから――それにつかまえるのも上手いのよ、ネズミを……あらごめんあそばせ！」とアリスはまた大声、だってそのときにはネズミも毛を全身逆立てていたから、ぜったい<ruby>
                            怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>おこ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>らせたなと思ってね、「おいやなら、このやりとりはもうひかえますけど。」</p>
                    <p>「やりとりだと？」と声をはるネズミは、しっぽの先までふるえていてね、「こっちが話に乗ったみてえな言いぐさじゃねえか！　うちは代々ずうっとネコが<span
                            class="emp.dash">大きれえ</span>なんだ、いじわるで下品な<ruby> 乱暴 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>らんぼう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ものめ！　もうその名をおれの前で出すんじゃねえ！」</p>
                    <p>「いたしませんとも！」とアリスはあわてて話の中身を変えようとする。「あなた――あなた、あれはお好き――その――犬は？」ネズミの返事がないので、アリスはこれはいいと続けてね、「お屋敷のそばのかわいい子犬、この子をお引き合わせしたくてよ！　すんだ目のちっちゃな<span
                            class="cultural"
                            >テリア</span>で、ほら、あるのよ！　もう長々とした茶色の巻き毛！　それに物を投げるとひろってくるの、あとちんちんしてごはんをおねだりしたり、もう色々――半分も思い出せなくてよ――そう、かい主は地主さんで、ほらお話でははたらき者で、<span
                            class="cultural">
                            <ruby> 金貨 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>きんか</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>１００まい分</span>のねうちものなの！　それにお話ではみんなやっつけるって、畑のネズミを――ああっ！」と大声をあげたアリス、やっちゃったというふうで。「またお気を悪くされたかしら。」だってもう全力で泳いではなれていくネズミ、進むほどに池はばしゃばしゃと波打つ。</p>
                    <p>それで後ろからやさしく声をかけたんだ、「ネズミさん！　おもどりになって、犬ネコどっちのお話もしないから、お好きでないなら！」するとそれを聞いたネズミは、くるっと回ってゆるゆる泳ぎもどってくる。顔は真っ青（<ruby>
                            怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>おこ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ってるんだなとアリス）、それからかすかに声をふるわせながら、「岸辺へ出んぞ、それからおれの昔話でもしてやっから、あんたもこっちがどうして犬ネコがきらいかわかるってもんだ。」</p>
                    <p>
                        <span class="onom">そろそろ</span>いい<ruby> 頃合 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ころあ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>い、だって池はもう落っこちてきた鳥なりケモノなりでぎゅうぎゅうづめになりかけてたからね。そこには<span
                            class="cultural">アヒル</span>も<span class="cultural">ドードー</span>も、<span
                            class="cultural">インコ</span>も<span class="cultural"
                        >子ワシ</span>も、そのほか色々かわった生き物がいてね、アリスがいちばん前に出て、みんないっしょに岸辺まで泳いでいったんだ。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
