<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts--Chapter 4</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 4</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"/>Cultural<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu"/>Incorrect Word Usage<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense Words<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"/>Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow"/>Play on Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"/>Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill</h3>
                    <p>It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously
                        about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to
                        itself ‘The Duchess! The <span class="cultural">Duchess</span>! Oh my dear
                        paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
                        ferrets! Where <span class="emp">CAN</span> I have dropped them, I wonder?’
                        Alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of
                        white kid gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them,
                        but they were nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since
                        her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the
                        little door, had vanished completely.</p>
                    <p>Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and called out
                        to her in an angry tone, ‘Why, Mary Ann, what <span class="emp">ARE</span>
                        you doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and
                        a fan! Quick, now!’ And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at
                        once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake
                        it had made.</p>
                    <p>‘He took me for his <span class="cultural">housemaid</span>,’ she said to
                        herself as she ran. ‘How surprised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But
                        I’d better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.’ As she
                        said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a
                        bright brass plate with the name <span class="emp">‘W. RABBIT’</span>
                        engraved upon it. She went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in
                        great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the
                        house before she had found the fan and gloves.</p>
                    <p>‘How queer it seems,’ Alice said to herself, ‘to be going messages for a
                        rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!’ And she began
                        fancying the sort of thing that would happen: ‘“Miss Alice! Come here
                        directly, and get ready for your walk!” “Coming in a minute, nurse! But I’ve
                        got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.” Only I don’t think,’ Alice went
                        on, ‘that they’d let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people
                        about like that!’</p>
                    <p>By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in
                        the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of
                        tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was
                        just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that
                        stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time with the words
                            <span class="emp">‘DRINK ME,’</span> but nevertheless she uncorked it
                        and put it to her lips. ‘I know <span class="emp">SOMETHING</span>
                        interesting is sure to happen,’ she said to herself, ‘whenever I eat or
                        drink anything; so I’ll just see what this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make
                        me grow large again, for really I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little
                        thing!’</p>
                    <p>It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk
                        half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to
                        stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put down the bottle,
                        saying to herself ‘That’s quite enough--I hope I shan’t grow any more--As it
                        is, I can’t get out at the door--I do wish I hadn’t drunk quite so
                        much!’</p>
                    <p>Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing, and
                        very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not
                        even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow
                        against the door, and the other arm curled round her head. Still she went on
                        growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
                        foot up the chimney, and said to herself ‘Now I can do no more, whatever
                        happens. What <span class="emp">WILL</span> become of me?’</p>
                    <p>Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and
                        she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to
                        be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder
                        she felt unhappy.</p>
                    <p>‘It was much pleasanter at home,’ thought poor Alice, ‘when one wasn’t always
                        growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits. I
                        almost wish I hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and yet--it’s
                        rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what <span
                            class="emp">CAN</span> have happened to me! When I used to read
                        fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am
                        in the middle of one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there
                        ought! And when I grow up, I’ll write one--but I’m grown up now,’ she added
                        in a sorrowful tone; ‘at least there’s no room to grow up any more <span
                            class="emp">HERE</span>.’</p>
                    <p>‘But then,’ thought Alice, ‘shall I <span class="emp">NEVER</span> get any
                        older than I am now? That’ll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old
                        woman--but then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like <span
                            class="emp">THAT</span>!’</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, you foolish Alice!’ she answered herself. ‘How can you learn lessons in
                        here? Why, there’s hardly room for <span class="emp">YOU</span>, and no room
                        at all for any lesson-books!’</p>
                    <p>And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making
                        quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a
                        voice outside, and stopped to listen.</p>
                    <p>‘Mary Ann! Mary Ann!’ said the voice. ‘Fetch me my gloves this moment!’ Then
                        came a little <span class="onom">pattering</span> of feet on the stairs.
                        Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till
                        she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand
                        times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.</p>
                    <p>Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as the
                        door opened inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it, that
                        attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself ‘Then I’ll go round
                        and get in at the window.’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">THAT</span> you won’t’ thought Alice, and, after waiting
                        till she fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
                        spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of
                        anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken
                        glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into
                        a <span class="cultural">cucumber-frame</span>, or something of the
                        sort.</p>
                    <p>Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit’s--‘Pat! Pat! Where are you?’ And then a
                        voice she had never heard before, ‘Sure then I’m here! Digging for apples,
                        yer honour!’</p>
                    <p>‘Digging for apples, indeed!’ said the Rabbit angrily. ‘Here! Come and help
                        me out of <span class="emp">THIS</span>!’ (Sounds of more broken glass.)</p>
                    <p>‘Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the window?’</p>
                    <p>‘Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!’ (He pronounced it ‘arrum.’)</p>
                    <p>‘An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
                        window!’</p>
                    <p>‘Sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.’</p>
                    <p>‘Well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!’</p>
                    <p>There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers now
                        and then; such as, ‘Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at all!’ ‘Do
                        as I tell you, you coward!’ and at last she spread out her hand again, and
                        made another snatch in the air. This time there were <span class="emp"
                            >TWO</span> little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. ‘What a
                        number of <span class="cultural">cucumber-frames</span> there must be!’
                        thought Alice. ‘I wonder what they’ll do next! As for pulling me out of the
                        window, I only wish they <span class="emp">COULD</span>! I’m sure I don’t
                        want to stay in here any longer!’</p>
                    <p>She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
                        rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all
                        talking together: she made out the words: ‘Where’s the other ladder?--Why, I
                        hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other--Bill! fetch it here,
                        lad!--Here, put ‘em up at this corner--No, tie ‘em together first--they
                        don’t reach half high enough yet--Oh! they’ll do well enough; don’t be
                        particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind
                        that loose slate--Oh, it’s coming down! Heads below!’ (a loud crash)--‘Now,
                        who did that?--It was Bill, I fancy--Who’s to go down the chimney?--Nay, I
                        shan’t! <span class="emp">YOU</span> do it!--That I won’t, then!--Bill’s to
                        go down--Here, Bill! the master says you’re to go down the chimney!’</p>
                    <p>‘Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?’ said Alice to herself.
                        ‘Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in Bill’s place
                        for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but I <span
                            class="emp">THINK</span> I can kick a little!’</p>
                    <p>She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she
                        heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was) scratching
                        and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself
                        ‘This is Bill,’ she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen
                        next.</p>
                    <p>The first thing she heard was a general chorus of ‘There goes Bill!’ then the
                        Rabbit’s voice along--‘Catch him, you by the hedge!’ then silence, and then
                        another confusion of voices--‘Hold up his head--Brandy now--Don’t choke
                        him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell us all about
                        it!’</p>
                    <p>Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, [‘That’s Bill,’ thought Alice,)
                        ‘Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I’m better now--but I’m a deal too
                        flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me like a <span
                            class="cultural">Jack-in-the-box</span>, and up I goes like a
                        sky-rocket!’</p>
                    <p>‘So you did, old fellow!’ said the others.</p>
                    <p>‘We must burn the house down!’ said the Rabbit’s voice; and Alice called out
                        as loud as she could, ‘If you do. I’ll set Dinah at you!’</p>
                    <p>There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, ‘I wonder
                        what they <span class="emp">WILL</span> do next! If they had any sense,
                        they’d take the roof off.’ After a minute or two, they began moving about
                        again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, ‘A barrowful will do, to begin
                        with.’</p>
                    <p>‘A barrowful of <span class="emp">WHAT</span>?’ thought Alice; but she had
                        not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
                        rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. ‘I’ll put a
                        stop to this,’ she said to herself, and shouted out, ‘You’d better not do
                        that again!’ which produced another dead silence.</p>
                    <p>Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
                        little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head.
                        ‘If I eat one of these cakes,’ she thought, ‘it’s sure to make <span
                            class="emp">SOME</span> change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make
                        me larger, it must make me smaller, I suppose.’</p>
                    <p>So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began
                        shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through the door,
                        she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and
                        birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle,
                        being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a
                        bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran
                        off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood.</p>
                    <p>‘The first thing I’ve got to do,’ said Alice to herself, as she wandered
                        about in the wood, ‘is to grow to my right size again; and the second thing
                        is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be the best
                        plan.’</p>
                    <p>It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged;
                        the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about
                        it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little
                            shar<span class="onom">p bark</span> just over her head made her look up
                        in a great hurry.</p>
                    <p>An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly
                        stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. ‘Poor little thing!’ said
                        Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was
                        terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in
                        which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her
                        coaxing.</p>
                    <p>Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it
                        out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet
                        at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe
                        to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from
                        being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
                        made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to
                        get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very like having a game of <span
                            class="cultural">play with a cart-horse</span>, and expecting every
                        moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the
                        puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little
                        way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the
                        while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue
                        hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.</p>
                    <p>This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off
                        at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the
                        puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.</p>
                    <p>‘And yet what a dear little puppy it was!’ said Alice, as she leant against a
                        buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: ‘I
                        should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I’d only been the
                        right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that I’ve got to <span
                            class="pow">grow up</span> again! Let me see--how <span class="emp"
                            >IS</span> it to be managed? I suppose I ought to eat or drink something
                        or other; but the great question is, what?’</p>
                    <p>The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at the
                        flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked
                        like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances. There was a
                        large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when
                        she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred
                        to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.</p>
                    <p>She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom,
                        and her eyes immediately met those of a large <span class="cultural"
                            >caterpillar</span>, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
                        quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or
                        of anything else.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>ウサギ、ビルくんをさしむける</h3>
                    <p>なんと白ウサギがとろとろと引き返してきたわけで、歩きながらあたりをきょろきょろ、なくしものでもしたみたいで。そのひとりごとが聞こえてくる。「<ruby>
                            御前 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ごぜん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>さま！　<span class="cultural">御前</span>さま！　おお、<span class="onom"
                            >ぴょんぴょん</span>！　ああ、ぴょんぬるかな！　このままではあの方から<ruby> 処 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しょ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>されてしまう、白イタチが白イタチのようにまさしく！　どこで落とした<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ものか</span>、はてさて。」アリスははたと気づいてね、あのせんすと白ヤギの手ぶくろをさがしてるんだって、だから親切のつもりであたりをさがそうとしたんだけど、もうどこにも見当たらなくって――すっかり様子が変わったみたいで、池で泳いでからこっち、ガラスのテーブルも小さなドアも大広間ごとまったく消えてしまっていて。</p>
                    <p>はやまもなくウサギに気づかれたアリスは、ちょうどあたりをさがして<span class="onom"
                            >うろうろ</span>してたんだけど、もう頭ごなしに<ruby> 怒 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>おこ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>られてね、「おいメリアン！　こんなところで何を<span class="emp.dash"
                        >しておじゃる</span>！　とっとと家へ一走りして、手ぶくろとせんすを持っておじゃれ！　早よう、ほれ！」するとおびえきったアリスは指さす方へすぐさまかけ足、人ちがいだと言おうにも言えずじまい。</p>
                    <p>「あたくしをメイドとかんちがいするなんて。」と走りながらひとりごと。「あたくしがだれだかわかったら、おどろいてよ！　でも今はせんすと手ぶくろを取ってきた方がよさそう――まあ、あったらの話ですけど。」と言ってるうちに目の前にこじんまりしたおうち、ドアのところには<span
                            class="onom">つるつる</span>した金ぞくの<ruby> 表札 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひょうさつ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、お名前には<span class="emp">〈シロー・ウサギ〉</span>とほられていまして。<span class="onom"
                            >とんとん</span>ともせずに立ち入るなり、<ruby> 階段 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かいだん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>をかけのぼった、だって本物のメリアンと出くわすとまずいことになるからね、せんすと手ぶくろ見つける前に家から追い出されちゃうし。</p>
                    <p>「なんてけったいなのかしら、」とアリスはひとりごと、「ウサギのお使いだなんて！　今度はダイナがあたくしをお使いにやるんじゃなくって？」すると、こうなるのかなって、あれやこれや思いうかんできてね、「『アリスおじょうさま、ただちにこちらへ、おさんぽのごしたくを！』『今行くから、ばあや！　でもこのネズミ穴を見はらないと、ダイナがもどってくるまで、あとネズミがにげでてこないか見ておかないと。』でもたぶん、」とアリスは続ける、「もうダイナはうちに置いとけなくなってよ、そんなことをあの子が人間に言いつけだしたら！」</p>
                    <p>このときまでになんとか入れたお部屋はこぎれいなところで、まどぎわにテーブルがひとつあり、その上には（思った通り）せんすとちっちゃい白ヤギの手ぶくろが何組か置いてあった。せんすと手ぶくろ１組を取り上げて出て行こうとしたとき、目に飛びこんできたのが、鏡わきに立てられた小びん。今度は<span
                            class="emp">〈ノンデ〉</span>の<ruby> 札 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ふだ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>もなかったのに、<span class="onom">さらさら</span>気にせずせんをぬいて口につけてね。「きっと<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >なにか</span>面白いことが起きるにきまっててよ。」とひとりごと。「なにか食べたり飲んだりするといつもそう、だからこのびんだってきっと。今度はまた大きくなってくれるといいな、だってもうこんなにちーっちゃくなるのなんてほんとにうんざり！」</p>
                    <p>してこれその通りに、しかも思ってたよりも<ruby> 早々 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>はやばや</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、びん半分ものまないうちに、気づけば頭が天井におさえつけられるので、首が折れないようにと身をかがめるはめに。あわててびんを下に置きながらひとりごと。「もうけっこうよ――もう大きくならなくていいから――このままじゃドアを出られない――あんなにたっぷり飲むんじゃなかった！」</p>
                    <p>なんたること！　そうは思ってももはや手おくれ！　<span class="onom"
                            >ぐんぐん</span>大きくなっていって、たちまちゆかにひざをつくほかなくなり、またたくまにそうするよゆうもなくなって、なんとか横になろうとしてね、ひじをドアにぶつけたり、反対のうでを頭まわりでまるめたり。まだまだ大きくなるから、最後の手として、うでの片方をまどの外へ出して、片足をえんとつのなかにつっこんで、そこでひとりごと。「もうこれでせいいっぱい、どうやっても。<span
                            class="emp.dash">これから</span>あたくしどうなるの？」</p>
                    <p>アリスにさいわい、まほうの小びんのききめはここで打ち止め、もう大きくはならない。とはいえやっぱりいごこち悪く、それにどうにも自分はこのお部屋の外に出られる見こみもなさそうで、気がふさぐのもむりはなく。</p>
                    <p>「おうちにいた方がまだいい。」とは、ふびんなアリスの想い。「ずっとのびちぢみしてばっかりとか、ネズミ・ウサギに頭ごなしってこともなくって。あのウサギ穴に入らなきゃよかった、って思う――けど――けれど――どこかへんてこ、ほら、こんな世界って。ふしぎなの、どんなことが起こって<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >くれる</span>のって！　いつもおとぎ話を読んでると、そんなのぜったい起こりっこないってきめつけるのに、いま、ここで、あたくしはそのまっただなか！　なら、あたくしについて書かれた本があってもよくてよ、じゃなくて？　大きくなったら書くんだから――まあ、今だって大きいけれど、」と、いじらしい口ぶりで続けてね、「といっても、<span
                            class="onom">ぎゅうぎゅう</span>で<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ここでは</span>もう大きくなれなくてよ。」</p>
                    <p>「だとすると、」とアリスは思う。「今よりもう年は取らないってこと？　ほっとしなくはないわ――おばあちゃんにならなくていいし――でもそうなると――いつまでもお勉強の山！　えっ、<span
                            class="emp.dash">そんなの</span>ぜったいいや！」</p>
                    <p>「もう、アリスのバカ！」とひとりふた役。「ここでお勉強なんて、できっこないんだから！　ね、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >あなただけで</span>
                        <span class="onom">ぎゅうぎゅう</span>だから、ぜんぜん入らなくってよ、教科書なんか！」</p>
                    <p>というわけでそのまま、まずひとりめの役、それからもうひとり、というように、かけ合いをぜんぶひとりでやってたんだけど、何分かすると外から声がして、やめて耳をそばだてる。</p>
                    <p>「メリアン！　メリアン！」とその声。「とっとと手ぶくろを持っておじゃれ！」そのあと、<ruby> 階段 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かいだん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>から<span class="onom"
                            >たたたた</span>とかすかな足音。アリスはウサギがさがしに来たとかんづいて、ふるえだしたらなんと家まで<span class="onom"
                            >ぐらぐら</span>、すっかりどわすれ、自分が今ウサギの何千倍も大きいなんてことはね、だったらこわがらなくていいわけで。</p>
                    <p>そくざにウサギはドアまで来て、開けようとしたのに、内側に<ruby> 開 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひら</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>くドアだから、アリスのひじがぐっとつっかえになって、やってみてもできずじまい。アリスの耳にひとりごとが、「ならば回りこんで、まどから入るでおじゃる。」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >そんなの</span>むーりー！」と思うアリス、待ちかまえて、まどのま下にウサギの気配がしたところで、いきなり手をのばして、そのままつかむそぶり。何もつかまえられなかったけど、聞こえてくる小さなさけび声と、ずっこけてガラスをわった音。というわけで頭のなかでは、キュウリのなえ箱かそんな感じのものにつっこんだのかも、てなことに。</p>
                    <p>お次に来るのは<span class="onom"
                            >ぷりぷり</span>声――ウサギのね――「パット！　パット！　どこにおじゃる！」それから今度は聞いたことのない声。「<span
                            class="emp.dash">ここ</span>におりますだ！　土リンゴほり中で、おやかたさま！」</p>
                    <p>「土リンゴほり、ほおお！」とぷんすかウサギ。「こちへおじゃれ、ここから出すでおじゃる！」（さらにガラスのわれた音。）</p>
                    <p>「さあ教えるでおじゃる、あのまどのものは何ぞえ？」</p>
                    <p>「きっとうんでだで、おやかたさま！」（正しくは、うで、ね。）</p>

                    <p>「うで！　あほうが！　あんな大きさのがおじゃるか！　ほれ、まどわくいっぱいぞ？」</p>
                    <p>「そうでごぜえますが、おやかたさま。やっぱどう見てもうんでだで。」</p>
                    <p>「なぬ、そんなの知ったことかえ、とにかくあれめを片づけておじゃれ！」</p>
                    <p>そのあと長々と静かで、アリスにもときどきささやき声が聞こえたくらい、それも「ぜってえいやですだ、おやかたさま、めっそうもねえ！」「言うた通りにおじゃれ、へたれめ！」といったもので、とうとうもう１度手をのばしてまたつかむそぶりをするはめに。今度は<span
                            class="emp.dash">ふたつ</span>の小さな<ruby> 悲鳴 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひめい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、それとまたしてもわれたガラスの音。「いっぱいたくさんキュウリのなえ箱があるのね！」とアリスは思う、「お次はどう出るかしら！　まどの外へ引き出すっていうなら、願ってもないこと<span
                            class="emp.dash">だけど</span>！　ほんっと<span class="emp.dash"
                        >もう</span>ここにじっとしてられなくってよ！」</p>
                    <p>しばらくじっとしているあいだ、何も聞こえなかったのだけど、ついに耳に入る<span class="onom"
                            >ごろごろ</span>手おし車の音、たくさんの話し合うざわめき、わかった言葉は、「もうひとつハシゴがおじゃったな――なんぞ、持ってくんのひとつだけでよかったんか。ビルがもひとつ持ってて――ビル！　こっち持ってこい、おい！――ここ、この角に立てかけ――ちがう、まずふたつつなげねえと――その高さだと、まだとどかな――おお！　これでちょうどいい、やかまし言うな――ここだ、ビル！　このロープをつかめ――やねはだいじょうぶか？――気をつけろ、あのかわら、ずれて――あ、落ちてくる！　下の、気をつけい！」（ずどーん）――「さて、だれがあれやる？――ビルじゃねえか――だれがえんとつおりるでおじゃ――やめろ、<span
                            class="emp.dash">おらあ</span>いやだ！　<span class="emp.dash"
                            >てめえ</span>行けよ！――んな、おらだって<span class="emp.dash"
                        >そんなの</span>！　行くべきはビルでおじゃる――おい、ビル！　おやかたさまがおおせだ、お前さんえんとつを下りてけって！」</p>
                    <p>「まあ！　ならビルがえんとつを下りなくちゃいけないってこと？」とアリスはひとりごと。「ふぅん、ぜんぶビルにおしつけたみたいね！　あたくしも、たくさんもらったってビルの代わりはおことわり。そこのだんろはたしかにせまいけど、<span
                            class="emp.dash">たぶん</span>ちょっとけり上げるくらいは！」</p>
                    <p>できるだけだんろの底の方まで足を引いて、小動物の気配がするまで待ちぶせ、（相手の正体もよくわからないままに）がりっそろそろと、えんとつのなか間近あたりまで、とそのとき、「こいつがビルね」とひとりごとついでにしゅっとけり上げて、じっとして次に起こることをさぐる。</p>
                    <p>まず初めに聞こえたのが「ありゃビルだ」の大がっしょう、それからひとりウサギの声――「受け止めるでおじゃる、生けがきのそばぞ！」しーんとしたあと、また今度は<span
                            class="onom"
                            >ざわざわ</span>あわてふためく――「あごを上だ――ブランデーを――つまらせるなよ――どういうことだ、おめえさん。何があった？　<ruby>
                            子細 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>しさい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を教えてくれ。」</p>
                    <p>ついには、弱々しげな<span class="onom"
                            >きぃきぃ</span>声、（「こいつがビルね」とはアリスの考え）「んあ、よくわかんねえ――もうええ、あんがと。もうようなった――でも頭がこんがらがって何つったら――わかんのは、何かがこっちに来た、<span
                            class="cultural">びっくり箱</span>みてえに、んで、ぴょーんとロケット花火みてえに空へ。」</p>
                    <p>「たしかにそんなんだった、おめえさん！」と一同。</p>
                    <p>「この家を焼きはらわんとな！」とはウサギの声、そこでアリスはあらんばかりの大声でさけぶ、「やってみなさい、あなたたちにダイナをけしかけてよ！」</p>
                    <p>たちまち死んだようにしーんとなって、ひとり考えこむアリス、「次はどう出る<span class="emp.dash"
                        >つもり</span>なのかしら！　まともに考えれば、屋根を外すとかだけど。」ものの数分もするとまたわたわたしだして、アリスの耳にもウサギの声が、「手おし車１台分でおじゃるな、まずは。」</p>
                    <p>「１台分の、<span class="emp.dash"
                        >何</span>？」と思うアリス。でもそのなやみもすぐに晴れて、とたんに小石がたくさんぱらぱらと窓から入ってきて、いくつか顔に当たったり。「せき止めてやってよ、」とひとりごとのあと、大声でさけぶ、「またやったらしょうちしないんだから！」そうするとまたまたしーんとしずか。</p>
                    <p>アリスがはっとしてちょっとびっくり、なんとその小石、みんなゆかに落ちると小ぶりのケーキに変わってね、そこでぴんとひらめいた。「このケーキをひとつ食べたら、」と考えるアリス、「きっとあたくしの大きさも<span
                            class="emp.dash">何かしら</span>変わるはず。まあたぶん大きくはならないから、小さくなるってだんどり、かしらね。」</p>
                    <p>そこでケーキをひとつ丸飲みすると、気づけばうれしいことにいきなりちぢんでいく。ドアを通りぬけられるくらいに小さくなると、とたんにそのおうちからかけ出てね、すると見つかるのは外で立ちつくす小動物や小鳥たちのむれ。かわいそうにトカゲのビルくんはまんなかにいて、２ひきのモルモットにかかえられてて、びんから何か飲ませてもらっていたり。みんなして、アリスが出てきたのを見るなりおそいかかってきたんだけど、こっちもひっしで走ってね、たちまち気づくとぶじ深い森のなかにいて。</p>
                    <p>「第１にやるべきことは、」とアリスは森をうろうろしながらひとりごと。「また元の背たけになること、それから第２は、あのすてきなお庭へ出る道を見つけること。どうもそうしてみるのがいちばんよさそう。」</p>
                    <p>たしかに、してみるにうってつけで、すっきりわかりやすい思いつきに聞こえる。だけど、ただひとつこまったことに、とっかかりがさっぱりわからなくってね。そうして、あたりの木々のあいだを<span
                            class="onom">そわそわ</span>とのぞきこんでいると、<span class="onom"
                        >ワン</span>とほえる声が頭の上からして、それはもうびくっと顔を起こしたんだ。</p>
                    <p>１ぴきの図体のでかいワンコが、<span class="onom">くりくり</span>大きなお目々でこっちを見ていてね、<span
                            class="onom"
                            >ぷるぷる</span>と前足をのばしてさわろうとしてくる。「よしよし！」とアリスはあやす言葉のあと、口ぶえを強くふこうとしたんだけど、相手がはらぺこなのかなと気づいたら<span
                            class="onom"
                        >ぶるぶる</span>がとまらなくなっちゃってね、そうなってくると、いくらなだめてもやっぱりぺろり食べられちゃうわけで。</p>
                    <p>もう思わずとっさに木切れをひろい上げてワンコにつきだしてみた。するとワンコはたちまちおどりあがって、きゃんきゃんはしゃぐ、そして木切れにとびかかって、どうもじゃれたいみたいでね、そこでアリスもふみつぶされないよう、でっかいアザミのかげにひらりとよける、そして反対側から出ると、すぐさまワンコが木切れめがけてまたつっこんできたんだけど、でもつかまえようとあせるあまりすってんころりん、これはもう、考えてみれば<span
                            class="cultural"
                            >馬車馬とふざけ合ってるみたい</span>なものだから、アリスも足でふみつけられそうなときには、そのたびごと、はっとしてかけ足でアザミに回りこむ、だからワンコにしても小きざみに木切れへしかけるようになってね、<span
                            class="onom"
                            >じわじわ</span>前につめるかと思いきや大きく後ろ、しじゅうぐるるるとほえっぱなしだったんだけど、はてにはとうとうはなれたところでへたりこんで、<span
                            class="onom">はあはあ</span>と口から舌を出して大きなお目々も半びらき。</p>
                    <p>これにアリスも、にげるのは今しかないとふんで、そこですぐさま動いてかけ足、そのうちこっちも<span class="onom"
                        >へとへと</span>で息切れ、やがてワンコのほえる声も遠くかすかになっていってね。</p>
                    <p>「まあでも、あんなワンコ、かわいらしいものね！」とアリスはひと息つこうとキンポウゲにもたれかかり、その葉っぱであおぎながら、「芸をしこんでみるのもけっこう面白そう、その――元の背たけになったらの話だけど！　んもう！　もう少しで元通りになるのをわすれるところよ！　う～んと――どう<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >やれば</span>うまくいくのかしら。たぶん何かしら食べるか飲むかすればいいんだろうけど、いったいぜんたい、何を？」</p>
                    <p>その通り、いったいぜんたい、何を？　アリスがあたりをながめまわしても、草花あれど、都合よく飲み食いできそうなものはその場に何も見当たらない。ところがそばにひょっこり大きな<span
                            class="emp"
                        >キノコ</span>、背たけと同じくらい。で、見上げたり、両わき、後ろに回ってみたりするうち、ふと思いつく。かさの上に何があるのか、目を向けてたしかめてみようかなって。</p>
                    <p>つまさき立ちで背のびして、<span class="emp"
                            >キノコ</span>のへりからのぞきこむと、目にとびこんできたのが、こっちを向いた大きな<span class="cultural"
                            >青虫</span>、てっぺんにすわりこんでうでを組み、ひそやかに水ぎせるをふかして、こちらにも何にも気にとめるそぶりがちっともない。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
