<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="alice.js">/**/</script>
        <title>Texts--Chapter 6</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="navbar" id="textNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></li>
                <li><a class="inpage" href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 6</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="buttons">
                <div class="button-container">
                    <p>Click a checkbox to toggle a feature on or off in the text.</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="cultural"/>Cultural<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="iu"/>Incorrect Word Usage<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="ns" />Nonsense Words<br/></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="onom"/>Onomatopoeia<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="pow"/>Play on Words<br /></li>
                        <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" value="rep"/>Repetition<br /></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>Pig and Pepper</h3>
                    <p>For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do
                        next, when suddenly a <span class="cultural">footman</span> in <span
                            class="cultural">livery</span> came running out of the wood--(she
                        considered him to be a <span class="cultural">footman</span> because he was
                        in <span class="cultural">livery</span>: otherwise, judging by his face
                        only, she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with
                        his knuckles. It was opened by another <span class="cultural">footman</span>
                        in <span class="cultural">livery</span>, with a round face, and large eyes
                        like a frog; and both <span class="cultural">footmen</span>, Alice noticed,
                        had <span class="cultural">powdered hair</span> that curled all over their
                        heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and crept a
                        little way out of the wood to listen.</p>
                    <p>The Fish-<span class="cultural">Footman</span> began by producing from under
                        his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over
                        to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, ‘For the Duchess. An invitation from
                        the Queen to play croquet.’ The Frog-<span class="cultural">Footman</span>
                        repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the words a
                        little, ‘From the Queen. An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.’</p>
                    <p>Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.</p>
                    <p>Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for
                        fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the Fish-<span
                            class="cultural">Footman</span> was gone, and the other was sitting on
                        the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.</p>
                    <p>Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.</p>
                    <p>‘There’s no sort of use in knocking,’ said the <span class="cultural"
                            >Footman</span>, ‘and that for two reasons. First, because I’m on the
                        same side of the door as you are; secondly, because they’re making such a
                        noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.’ And certainly there was a
                        most extraordinary noise going on within--a constant howling and sneezing,
                        and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken
                        to pieces.</p>
                    <p>‘Please, then,’ said Alice, ‘how am I to get in?’</p>
                    <p>‘There might be some sense in your knocking,’ the <span class="cultural"
                            >Footman</span> went on without attending to her, ‘if we had the door
                        between us. For instance, if you were <span class="emp">INSIDE</span>, you
                        might knock, and I could let you out, you know.’ He was looking up into the
                        sky all the time he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil.
                        ‘But perhaps he can’t help it,’ she said to herself; ‘his eyes are so <span
                            class="emp">VERY</span> nearly at the top of his head. But at any rate
                        he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?’ she repeated, aloud.</p>
                    <p>‘I shall sit here,’ the <span class="cultural">Footman</span> remarked, ‘till
                        tomorrow--’</p>
                    <p>At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming
                        out, straight at the Footman’s head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to
                        pieces against one of the trees behind him.</p>
                    <p>‘--or next day, maybe,’ the <span class="cultural">Footman</span> continued
                        in the same tone, exactly as if nothing had happened.</p>
                    <p>‘How am I to get in?’ asked Alice again, in a louder tone.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">ARE</span> you to get in at all?’ said the Footman.
                        ‘That’s the first question, you know.’</p>
                    <p>It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. ‘It’s really
                        dreadful,’ she muttered to herself, ‘the way all the creatures argue. It’s
                        enough to drive one crazy!’</p>
                    <p>The <span class="cultural">Footman</span> seemed to think this a good
                        opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations. ‘I shall sit here,’
                        he said, ‘on and off, for days and days.’</p>
                    <p>‘But what am I to do?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Anything you like,’ said the <span class="cultural">Footman</span>, and
                        began whistling.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,’ said Alice desperately: ‘he’s
                        perfectly idiotic!’ And she opened the door and went in.</p>
                    <p>The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end
                        to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in the middle,
                        nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large
                        cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.</p>
                    <p>‘There’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!’ Alice said to herself, as
                        well as she could for sneezing.</p>
                    <p>There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed
                        occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alternately
                        without a moment’s pause. The only things in the kitchen that did not
                        sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and
                            <span class="pow">grinning from ear to ear</span>.</p>
                    <p>‘Please would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little timidly, for she was not
                        quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, ‘why your cat
                        grins like that?’</p>
                    <p>‘It’s a Cheshire cat,’ said the Duchess, ‘and that’s why. Pig!’</p>
                    <p>She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but
                        she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her,
                        so she took courage, and went on again:--</p>
                    <p>‘I didn’t know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn’t know that
                        cats <span class="emp">COULD</span> grin.’</p>
                    <p>‘They all can,’ said the Duchess; ‘and most of ‘em do.’</p>
                    <p>‘I don’t know of any that do,’ Alice said very politely, feeling quite
                        pleased to have got into a conversation.</p>
                    <p>‘You don’t know much,’ said the Duchess; ‘and that’s a fact.’</p>
                    <p>Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would be as
                        well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she was trying
                        to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once
                        set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the
                        baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans,
                        plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of them even when they hit
                        her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible
                        to say whether the blows hurt it or not.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, <span class="emp">PLEASE</span> mind what you’re doing!’ cried Alice,
                        jumping up and down in an agony of terror. ‘Oh, there goes his <span
                            class="emp">PRECIOUS</span> nose’; as an unusually large saucepan flew
                        close by it, and very nearly carried it off.</p>
                    <p>‘If everybody minded their own business,’ the Duchess said in a hoarse growl,
                        ‘the world would go round a deal faster than it does.’</p>
                    <p>‘Which would <span class="emp">NOT</span> be an advantage,’ said Alice, who
                        felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her
                        knowledge. ‘Just think of what work it would make with the day and night!
                        You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its <span
                            class="pow">axis</span>--’</p>
                    <p>‘Talking of <span class="pow">axes</span>,’ said the Duchess, ‘<span
                            class="pow">chop off her head</span>!’</p>
                    <p>Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the
                        hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be
                        listening, so she went on again: ‘Twenty-four hours, I <span class="emp"
                            >THINK</span>; or is it twelve? I--’</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, don’t bother <span class="emp">ME</span>,’ said the Duchess; ‘I never
                        could abide figures!’ And with that she began nursing her child again,
                        singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake
                        at the end of every line:</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp016"> ‘Speak roughly to your little boy, <br /> And beat
                                him when he sneezes: <br /> He only does it to annoy, <br /> Because
                                he knows it teases.’ </span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="emp">CHORUS</span>.<br /> (In which the cook and the baby
                            joined):--<br /> ‘Wow! wow! wow!’</p>
                    </div>
                    <p>While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the
                        baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that Alice
                        could hardly hear the words:--</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp016"> ‘I speak severely to my boy, <br /> I beat him when
                                he sneezes; <br /> For he can thoroughly enjoy <br /> The pepper
                                when he pleases!’ </span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="emp">CHORUS</span>.<br /> Wow! wow! wow!’ </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>‘Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!’ the Duchess said to Alice,
                        flinging the baby at her as she spoke. ‘I must go and get ready to play
                        croquet with the Queen,’ and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw a
                        frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.</p>
                    <p>Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped little
                        creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, ‘just like a
                        star-fish,’ thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting like a
                        steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
                        straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or
                        two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.</p>
                    <p>As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist
                        it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and
                        left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the
                        open air. ‘<span class="emp">IF</span> I don’t take this child away with
                        me,’ thought Alice, ‘they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
                        murder to leave it behind?’ She said the last words out loud, and the little
                        thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). ‘Don’t <span
                            class="onom">grunt</span>,’ said Alice; ‘that’s not at all a proper way
                        of expressing yourself.’</p>
                    <p>The baby <span class="onom">grunted</span> again, and Alice looked very
                        anxiously into its face to see what was the matter with it. There could be
                        no doubt that it had a <span class="emp">VERY</span> turn-up nose, much more
                        like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small
                        for a baby: altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at all. ‘But
                        perhaps it was only sobbing,’ she thought, and looked into its eyes again,
                        to see if there were any tears.</p>
                    <p>No, there were no tears. ‘If you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,’ said
                        Alice, seriously, ‘I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind now!’ The
                        poor little thing sobbed again (or <span class="onom">grunted</span>, it was
                        impossible to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.</p>
                    <p>Alice was just beginning to think to herself, ‘Now, what am I to do with this
                        creature when I get it home?’ when it <span class="onom">grunted</span>
                        again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This
                        time there could be NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a
                        pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it
                        further.</p>
                    <p>So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it trot
                        away quietly into the wood. ‘If it had grown up,’ she said to herself, ‘it
                        would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig,
                        I think.’ And she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do
                        very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, ‘if one only knew the
                        right way to change them--’ when she was a little startled by seeing the
                        Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a <span class="cultural">few
                            yards</span> off.</p>
                    <p>The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she thought:
                        still it had <span class="emp">VERY</span> long claws and a great many
                        teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.</p>
                    <p>‘Cheshire Puss,’ she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
                        whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
                        ‘Come, it’s pleased so far,’ thought Alice, and she went on. ‘Would you tell
                        me, please, which way I ought to go from here?’</p>
                    <p>‘That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,’ said the Cat.</p>
                    <p>‘I don’t much care where--’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,’ said the Cat.</p>
                    <p>‘--so long as I get <span class="emp">SOMEWHERE</span>,’ Alice added as an
                        explanation.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, you’re sure to do that,’ said the Cat, ‘if you only walk long
                        enough.’</p>
                    <p>Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
                        ‘What sort of people live about here?’</p>
                    <p>‘In <span class="emp">THAT</span> direction,’ the Cat said, waving its right
                        paw round, ‘lives a Hatter: and in <span class="emp">THAT</span> direction,’
                        waving the other paw, ‘lives a <span class="cultural">March</span> Hare.
                        Visit either you like: they’re both mad.’</p>
                    <p>‘But I don’t want to go among mad people,’ Alice remarked.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, you can’t help that,’ said the Cat: ‘we’re all mad here. I’m mad. You’re
                        mad.’</p>
                    <p>‘How do you know I’m mad?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘You must be,’ said the Cat, ‘or you wouldn’t have come here.’</p>
                    <p>Alice didn’t think that proved it at all; however, she went on ‘And how do
                        you know that you’re mad?’</p>
                    <p>‘To begin with,’ said the Cat, ‘a dog’s not mad. You grant that?’</p>
                    <p>‘I suppose so,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Well, then,’ the Cat went on, ‘you see, a dog growls when it’s angry, and
                        wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now I growl when I’m pleased, and wag my
                        tail when I’m angry. Therefore I’m mad.’</p>
                    <p>‘I call it purring, not growling,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Call it what you like,’ said the Cat. ‘Do you play croquet with the Queen
                        to-day?’</p>
                    <p>‘I should like it very much,’ said Alice, ‘but I haven’t been invited
                        yet.’</p>
                    <p>‘You’ll see me there,’ said the Cat, and vanished.</p>
                    <p>Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things
                        happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly
                        appeared again.</p>
                    <p>‘By-the-bye, what became of the baby?’ said the Cat. ‘I’d nearly forgotten to
                        ask.’</p>
                    <p>‘It turned into a pig,’ Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back in a
                        natural way.</p>
                    <p>‘I thought it would,’ said the Cat, and vanished again.</p>
                    <p>Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear,
                        and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the March
                        Hare was said to live. ‘I’ve seen hatters before,’ she said to herself; ‘the
                        March Hare will be much the most interesting, and <span class="pow">perhaps
                            as this is May it won’t be raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in
                            March</span>.’ As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
                        again, sitting on a branch of a tree.</p>
                    <p>‘Did you say <span class="rp017">pig, or fig</span>?’ said the Cat.</p>
                    <p>‘I said pig,’ replied Alice; ‘and I wish you wouldn’t keep appearing and
                        vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.’</p>
                    <p>‘All right,’ said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, beginning
                        with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time
                        after the rest of it had gone.</p>
                    <p>‘Well! I’ve often seen a cat without a grin,’ thought Alice; ‘but a grin
                        without a cat! It’s the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!’</p>
                    <p>She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the
                        March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys
                        were shaped like ears and the roof was <span class="cultural"
                            >thatched</span> with fur. It was so large a house, that she did not
                        like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of
                        mushroom, and raised herself to about <span class="cultural">two feet</span>
                        high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
                        ‘Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost wish I’d gone to see
                        the Hatter instead!’</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>ブタとコショウ</h3>
                    <p>ものの数分ぼう立ちでおうちをながめて、次に何をしようかと思っているうち、ふいに<span class="cultural"
                            >お仕着せ</span>の<span class="cultural">めし使い</span>が森から走り出てきて――（そいつを<span
                            class="cultural">めし使い</span>だと見たのは<span class="cultural"
                            >お仕着せ</span>すがただったからで、そうでなかったら顔だけではお魚としかわからなかっただろうね）――それからにぎった手の角っこでドアを<span
                            class="onom">とんとん</span>。するとドアが開いて、<span class="cultural"
                            >お仕着せ</span>の<span class="cultural"
                            >めし使い</span>がもうひとり、丸顔で大きなお目々でカエルみたい。さらに<span class="cultural"
                            >めし使い</span>はふたりとも、見たところ頭に<ruby> 粉 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>こな</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>をふいた<span class="onom">くるくる</span>
                        <span class="cultural">まきのカツラ</span>をかぶっているようで。へんてこで一体全体何なのか<span
                            class="onom">わくわく</span>してきてね、森からそろりと少し身を乗り出して耳をすませる。</p>
                    <p>お魚<span class="cultural"
                        >めし使い</span>がまずわきから取り出だしたるは大きなお手紙、自分の体と同じほどの大きさで、これを相手に手わたしながら大げさに言うんだ、「御前さまへ。クイーンさまよりクローケーのおさそいなり。」カエルめし使いも同じく大げさにくりかえして「クイーンさまより。御前さまへクローケーのおさそいでありますか。」</p>
                    <p>そのあとふたりとも深々おじぎをすると、<span class="cultural">
                            <span class="onom">まきまき</span>カツラ</span>がからまりあう。</p>
                    <p>アリスは笑い転げてしまってね、さとられたかもと森のなかへかけもどるはめに。そうしてまた顔をのぞかせたときには、お魚<span
                            class="cultural"
                        >めし使い</span>はいなくなっていて、そのお相手がドアわきの地面にすわりこんで、空をぼんやり見つめていてね。</p>
                    <p>アリスは<span class="onom">おずおず</span>とドアのところへ行って、<span class="onom"
                        >とんとん</span>。</p>
                    <p>「ノックをしてもむだであります。」と言う<span class="cultural"
                            >めし使い</span>、「そのわけはふたつ。ひとつは、わたくしめがあなたさまと同じくドアのこちらがわにおりますゆえ。もうひとつは、なかが相当さわがしいので、あなたさまがたたいても、だれにも聞こえちゃおりません。」してみるとたしかに内がわでは今もとてつもない物音がしていて――ひっきりなしにどなる声とくしゃみの音、合間にいちいち<span
                            class="onom">がしゃんがしゃん</span>、まるでお皿かやかんが<ruby> 粉々 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>こなごな</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>にわれたみたい。</p>
                    <p>「それでしたら、」とアリス、「入るにはいかがすれば？」</p>
                    <p>「そもそもノックしてしかるべきは、」とめし使いはこちらの話も聞かずに続けてね、「おたがいがドアをはさんでいればこその話。たとえばあなたさまが<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >内がわ</span>にいて、ノックをしたなら、わたくしめは外へ出してさしあげます。」話しているあいだもずっと空を見上げていたので、アリスにはあからさまにおぎょうぎが悪く思えてね。「でももしややむをえないのかも。」とひとりごちて、「お目々が<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >まさに</span>頭のだいたいてっぺん。それにしても聞いたことに答えてくれてもいいんでなくて。――入るにはいかがすれば？」ともう１度大声。</p>
                    <p>「わたくしめはじっとここに、」と<span class="cultural">めし使い</span>の言い分、「明日まで……」</p>
                    <p>そのせつな、おうちのドアが開いて、大皿がすれすれを飛んできて、<span class="cultural"
                        >めし使い</span>の頭へまっしぐら。ちょうど鼻をかすめて、後ろの木のひとつに当たって粉々に。</p>
                    <p>「……いやその次の日まで、か。」と続ける<span class="cultural"
                        >めし使い</span>の話しぶりは、まったく何もなかったかのよう。</p>
                    <p>「入るにはいかがすれば？」とまたたずねるアリスはさらに声をはり上げていて。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">どうしても</span>なかへ入るのでありますか。」と<span class="cultural"
                            >めし使い</span>。「まずそこのところどうなんです、ほら。」</p>
                    <p>言われてみれば。ただアリスもそれだけは言われたくなくって。「なんてはしたない。」とアリスはぶつぶつひとりごと、「そろいもそろってつっかかってくる。頭がおかしくなってもよさそうなものね！」</p>
                    <p>
                        <span class="cultural"
                        >めし使い</span>はさきほどの言葉をくりかえすには今しかないと思ったのか、言い方を変えてね。「わたくしめはじっとここに、やすみやすみ、来る日も来る日も。」</p>
                    <p>「でも<span class="emp.dash">あたくし</span>はどうすればよくて？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「お好きにどうぞ。」と<span class="cultural">めし使い</span>は口笛をふきだして。</p>
                    <p>「もう、話していてもらちが開かなくてよ。」とやれやれのアリス。「まったくのうすのろね！」そうしてドアを開けてなかへお立ち入り。</p>
                    <p>ドアはそのまま台所に続いていてね、<span class="onom"
                            >もくもく</span>けむりがすみずみまでいっぱい。御前さまはお部屋のまんなか、３本足のいすにこしかけ、赤ちゃんをあやしている。コックが火元にぐっとよって、大きなおなべでなみなみとしたスープを<span
                            class="onom">まぜまぜ</span>。</p>
                    <p>「スープにこんなにコショウ、ぜったい入れすぎ！」アリスのひとりごとも、くしゃみのせいでこれがやっと。</p>
                    <p>コショウのひどさたるや、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >あたり</span>にまんえんするほど。御前さままでときおりはくしゅん、赤ちゃんはというと、ひっきりなしにかわるがわるくくしゅんおぎゃあ。台所にいてくしゃみをして<span
                            class="emp.dash">いない</span>のはただふたり、コックと図体のでかいネコ、そのネコは火元のそばに丸まって、<span
                            class="pow">耳にとどきそうなくらい<span class="onom">にこにこ</span>
                            <ruby> 愛想 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>あいそ</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>
                        </span>たっぷり。</p>
                    <p>「ごめんください、」と<span class="onom"
                        >おそるおそる</span>のアリス、そのわけはおぎょうぎとして、自分から話しかけていいものか自信がなかったから、「このネコちゃん、どうしてこんなに愛想がよろしいの？」</p>
                    <p>「こやつはチェシアのネコ、」と御前さま、「ゆえにな。ブタめ！」</p>
                    <p>しめにいきなりきつい言葉がでたので、アリスはもうとびあがってね、でもそのあとすぐ自分でなく赤ちゃんに向けたものとわかったから、気を取り直してまた話の続き。</p>
                    <p>「なるほどチェシアのネコは<ruby> 愛想 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>あいそ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>よしってわけ。まさかネコがこんなに愛想よく<span class="emp.dash">できる</span>なんて。」</p>
                    <p>「みなできおる、」と御前さま、「大半がそうしおる。」</p>
                    <p>「思いもよらなくてよ。」とアリスは取りつくろうものの、実はお話できたのがたいそううれしくって。</p>
                    <p>「そちがものを知らぬだけ、」と御前さま、「世のことわりじゃ。」</p>
                    <p>アリスもそんなふうに言われるのは気に入らなくて、何かべつの話をふった方がいいと思ってね。何かと決めかねているうちに、コックはスープのおなべを火から外すと、いきなりあたりのものを手当たり次第に御前さまと赤ちゃんに投げつけだしてね――火元の金具がまず飛んできて、そのあと続いて小なべやお大皿小皿が雨あられ。御前さまは自分に当たっても気にするそぶりさえなくって。赤ちゃんはずっとひどいくらいに泣きわめいてるから、ぶつかって痛いたいのか<ruby>
                            痛 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いた</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>くないのかもよくわからない。</p>
                    <p>「ねえ、<span class="emp.dash">いいかげん</span>気にしたらどうなの！」と声をはりあげるアリス、やきもきして<span
                            class="onom">ぴょんぴょん</span>、「ほら、その子の<span class="emp.dash"
                        >大事</span>なお鼻が！」そのときばかでかいシチューなべがぎりぎりのところに飛んできて、あわや鼻を持っていくところ。</p>
                    <p>「みながひとにちょっかい出さぬようになれば、」と御前さま<span class="onom"
                        >はガラガラ</span>声でうなってね、「世の中は今よりずいぶん早く回ろうというのに。」</p>
                    <p>「そんなことの<span class="emp.dash">どこが</span>いいの。」とアリスは<ruby> 知恵 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ちえ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>をひけらかすなら今だと<ruby> 得意満面 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>とくいまんめん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>。「考えてもみて、そんなことをしたら昼と夜がどうなるか！　いいこと、地球は自転するのに２４時間<span class="pow"
                            >ちょっきり</span>……」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">ちょっきりと</span>な、」と御前さま、「<span class="pow"
                            >こやつの首をちょっきりだ</span>！」</p>
                    <p>アリスは<span class="onom"
                            >そわそわ</span>とコックに目をやってね、そのひとがまさか言うとおりにはと様子をうかがったんだけど、コックはせわしなくスープをかきまぜるばかりで、話を聞いていたそぶりもないから、また口を開いて、「２４時間、<span
                            class="emp.dash">かな</span>？　あれ１２時間？　えーと……」</p>
                    <p>「ああ、だまらっ<span class="emp.dash"
                        >しゃい</span>！」と御前さま。「数字なぞいらいらする！」そうしてさらにはまた子どもをあやしだして、それらしく子守歌みたいなのをうたうんだけど、１ふしごとにきつくゆすってね――</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p> 「小さな子どもはどやしつけろ<br /> 　くしゃみをしたらぶったたけ<br /> そいつはただのいやがらせ<br />
                            　わかってやってる、このクソガキァ」 </p>
                        <p> コーラス<br /> （コックと赤子がいっしょになって）<br /> 「わう！　わう！　わう！」 </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>御前さまが２つめのふしをうたっているあいだなんか、赤ちゃんをあらあらしく上へ放り投げるわ、かわいそうに赤ちゃんは泣きわめくわで、アリスには歌詞かしが大半聞き取れなくて――</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p> 「わが家のガキにはしかりつける<br /> 　くしゃみをしたらぶったたく<br /> 放っておけばそのうちに<br />
                            　コショウだって楽しみやがる」 </p>
                        <p> コーラス<br /> 「わう！　わう！　わう！」 </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>「ほれ！　よければちょっとあやしてみるがよい！」と御前さまはアリスに言って、しゃべりきらないうちに赤ちゃんを放り投げてくる。「わらわは<span
                            class="onom">そろそろ</span>クイーンさまとのクローケーのしたくじゃ。」と部屋を<span class="onom"
                            >いそいそ</span>と出てゆく。去りぎわにコックが後ろからフライパンを投げつけたけど、ねらいは外れてね。</p>
                    <p>アリスがなんとか赤ちゃんを受け取ると、このけったいななりをした小さな生き物は手足を四方八方広げたので、「ヒトデみたい。」と思うアリス。かわいそうにこの小さいのは、受け取ったときには汽車のように鼻からぶーと湯気を出していて、やたら身をくねらせたりそりかえったりしたので、とにかくまずものの数分はかかえるだけでせいいっぱい。</p>
                    <p>ちゃんとあやすコツ（むすび目を作るみたいにねじって右の耳と左の足をぐっとおさえてほどけないようにすること）がわかるとすぐに、かかえたまま表に出てね。「あたくしがこの子を連れ出さなければ、」と思うアリス、「ものの数日できっと<ruby>
                            殺 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ころ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>されてしまってよ。置き去りにするなんて<ruby> 人殺 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ひとごろ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>しも<ruby> 同然 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>どうぜん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>じゃなくて？」おしまいのところはもう声にも出ていて、小さいのも何かぐずっていて（このときにはくしゃみもおさまっていてね）。「<span
                            class="onom">ブーブー</span>言わないの、」とアリス、「ものを言いたいのならちゃんとはっきり。」</p>
                    <p>赤ちゃんはまたもや<span class="onom"
                            >ブーブー</span>、そこでアリスはいぶかしげに顔をのぞいてね、何かあったのかと思って。するとどこからどう見ても、そこにあるのは<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                            >まさしく</span>上向きの鼻、人の鼻というよりはもうブタの鼻、しかも目は赤ちゃんにしてはひどく小さくなっていて、とにかくアリスはそいつの<ruby>
                            面 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>つら</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>がまったく気に入らない。「でもめそめそしてるだけかも。」と考えて、また目をのぞいて、なみだがないかたしかめてみる。</p>
                    <p>ない、なみだなんかちっとも。「ブタになったりしたら、まったく、」とアリスは真顔、「こんりんざいかまってあげなくてよ。めっ！」かわいそうにその小さいのはまたもや泣いて（というか<span
                            class="onom">ブーブー</span>、と言っていいものやら）、しばらくは何も言わずに進んでいってね。</p>
                    <p>アリスの頭にはよぎりはじめていたことがあってね、「ところでこの生き物をうちにつれかえって、あたくしはどうしようっていうのかしら。」するとそのときまた<span
                            class="onom">ブーブー</span>とうるさくするので、顔をのぞきこんでちょっとびっくり。今度はもう見まちがいのしようが<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >ない</span>、どこからどこまでもまったくのブタ、そうなるともはやつれていくのもとってもばからしくなってきてね。</p>
                    <p>そこでその小さい生き物を下ろして見守っていると、そそくさとっとこと森へ入っていったので、すごくほっとしてね。「大きくなったら、」とひとりごと、「ものすごくぶっさいくな子になりそうだったけど、ブタならちょっとはかっこよくなる、かも。」そうして今度は自分の知り合いのなかでもブタとしてならやっていけそうな子を思いうかべながら、ひとりごとを言おうとしてね、「ちゃんと化けるやり方を知ってたなら……」とちょうどそのとき、ちょっとびくっとしてね、目の前で、チェシアネコが<span
                            class="cultural">数メートル</span>先の木の大枝にちょこんといたんだ。</p>
                    <p>ネコは愛きょうよくにんまりするだけで、じっとアリスを見つめる。愛想のいいネコ、と思ったアリス。</p>
                    <p>しかも<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ほんとに</span>長いツメと、りっぱな歯がずらりとあるものだから、下手に出なければという気になってね。</p>
                    <p>「チェッシャにゃん。」とちょっぴり<span class="onom"
                        >おずおず</span>よびかけてね、だってそのよび方が相手のお気にめすかさっぱりわからなかったから。ところが向こうはさらにちょっとにやっとするだけ。「ふう、とりあえず気げんはいいみたい。」と思ったアリスは言葉を続けてね。「教えてくださいませんこと？　ここからどちらに行った方がよろしくて？」</p>
                    <p>「そいつはやっぱりお前の行きたいところ次第だにゃ。」とネコ。</p>
                    <p>「べつにどこでもよくてよ……」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「にゃら、どこへにゃりとも行けばいい。」とネコ。</p>
                    <p>「……ちゃんと<span class="emp.dash">どこか</span>へたどりつけるなら。」とアリスは付け足しの言いわけ。</p>
                    <p>「そりゃそにょくらいできるとも、」と言うネコ、「それにゃりに歩けば。」</p>
                    <p>アリスはたしかにもっともだと思ったので、今度はべつのことを問いかけてね。「このあたりには、どんなひとがお住み？」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash"
                            >あっち</span>の方にゃ、」とここでネコは右の肉球をぐるっとふってね、「ぼうし屋が住んでる。そんで<span
                            class="emp.dash">あっち</span>の方にゃ、」と今度は左の肉球をふって、「<span class="cultural"
                            >ヤヨイ</span>ウサギ。好きにゃ方に行け。どっちもおかしにゃやつだ。」</p>
                    <p>「でも、おかしなひとのところに行くのはごめんでしてよ。」と言い出すアリス。</p>
                    <p>「まあ仕方のにゃいこと。」とネコ。「ここじゃみんなおかしいにゃ。にゃあも、お前も。」</p>
                    <p>「あたくしがおかしい？　どうして？」</p>
                    <p>「そりゃそうにゃ、」とネコ、「でにゃきゃこんにゃとこに来ない。」</p>
                    <p>アリスはものも言いようだと思ったけど、とりあえず続けてね、「じゃあ、あなたがおかしいっていうのは？」</p>
                    <p>「まずもって、」とネコ、「犬はおかしくにゃい。これはいいにゃ？」</p>
                    <p>「まあそうね。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「にゃらわかるにゃ、」とたたみかけるネコ、「犬はおこるとうにゃって、うれしいとしっぽをふる。にゃのに、おいらはうれしいとうにゃるし、はらが立つとしっぽをふる。にゃから、おいらはおかしい。」</p>
                    <p>「それって、うなるじゃなくて、のどを鳴らすってことじゃ<span class="emp.dash">にゃいの</span>？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「どう言ってもおにゃじこと。」とネコ。「今日はクイーンとクローケーするんにゃにゃいのか？」</p>
                    <p>「ぜひやってみたくてよ。」とアリス、「でもおさそい受けてないし。」</p>
                    <p>「ではまたそこで。」と言うなりネコはぱっと消える。</p>
                    <p>アリスはこんなことにはもうわりと平気で、けったいなことが起きるのもなれっこ。それでもネコのいたところをじっと見ていたんだけど、するとまたぱっと出てきてね。</p>
                    <p>「ところで、赤んぼはどうにゃった？」とネコ。「聞くのをうっかりしてたにゃ。」</p>
                    <p>「ブタに化けてよ。」と事もなげに答えたアリスには、もうネコがもどってきたのも当たり前みたいで。</p>
                    <p>「そうにゃろうと思った。」と言ってネコはまた消える。</p>
                    <p>アリスはどうせまた出てくると思ってしばらく待ったんだけど、どうも出てこないので、ものの数分するとヤヨイウサギが住んでると言われた方へと進み出してね。「ぼうし屋は見たことあるから、」とひとりごと、「ヤヨイウサギの方がきっともっとずっと面白いはず、<span
                            class="pow"
                        >でもまあ今は５月だから、そこまでおかしくはないかも――少なくとも３月ほどおかしくないかな</span>。」こう口にしながら見上げると、なんとそこにはまたネコが木の枝にちょこん。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">『ブタ』にゃっけ、『ブナ』</span>にゃっけ？」とネコ。</p>
                    <p>「だから『ブタ』。」と答えるアリス、「あの、そんなむやみやたらにぱっと出たり消えたりしないでいただけて？　ひどくめまいがしてよ。」</p>
                    <p>「にゃるほど。」というネコ。なので今度はきわめてゆっくりと消えることにしてね、しっぽの先からじんわりと、おしまいには<ruby> 愛想
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>あいそ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>だけが本体が消えたあとにもなごりとしてしばらくあって。</p>
                    <p>「まあ！　愛想なしのネコならよく見るけど、」と思うアリス、「ネコなしの愛想だなんて！　生まれてこのかたこんなへんてこなこと見たのはじめて！」</p>
                    <p>そんなに歩くわけでもなくすぐにヤヨイウサギのおうちが目に入ってくる。そのおうちにちがいないと思ったのは、えんとつが耳みたいな形で、屋根が毛なみ<span
                            class="cultural">
                            <span class="onom">ふわふわ</span>
                        </span>だったから。大きなおうちだったので、はじめは近よりたくなかったけど、とうとう左手にあった<span class="emp"
                            >キノコ</span>のかけらをもうちょっとかじって、背たけを<span class="cultural"
                        >６０センチ</span>くらいに上げてね。そのあとでも近より方はこわごわで、ひとりごと、「やっぱりめちゃくちゃおかしかったらどうしよう！　こっちじゃなくぼうし屋の方に行けばよかったかな？」</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
