<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <title>Texts</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <ul>
            <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
            <li><a href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
            <li><a href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
            <li><a href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
        </ul>
        <div id="descriptionTable2">
            <table class="chapterHeader">
                <tr>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></td>
                </tr>
            </table>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 12</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>Alice’s Evidence</h3>
                    <p>‘Here!’ cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large
                        she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry
                        that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all
                        the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling
                        about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally
                        upset the week before.</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, I <span class="emp">BEG</span> your pardon!’ she exclaimed in a tone of
                        great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for
                        the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague
                        sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the
                        jury-box, or they would die.</p>
                    <p>‘The trial cannot proceed,’ said the King in a very grave voice, ‘until all
                        the jurymen are back in their proper places--<span class="emp">ALL</span>,’
                        he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.</p>
                    <p>Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the
                        Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail
                        about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got it out
                        again, and put it right; ‘not that it signifies much,’ she said to herself;
                        ‘I should think it would be <span class="emp">QUITE</span> as much use in
                        the trial one way up as the other.’</p>
                    <p>As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and
                        their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to
                        work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the
                        Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth
                        open, gazing up into the roof of the court.</p>
                    <p>‘What do you know about this business?’ the King said to Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Nothing,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Nothing <span class="emp">WHATEVER</span>?’ persisted the King.</p>
                    <p>‘Nothing whatever,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘That’s very important,’ the King said, turning to the jury. They were just
                        beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit
                        interrupted: ‘<span class="emp">UN</span>important, your Majesty means, of
                        course,’ he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at
                        him as he spoke.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">UN</span>important, of course, I meant,’ the King hastily
                        said, and went on to himself in an
                        undertone,‘important--unimportant--unimportant--important--’ as if he were
                        trying which word sounded best.</p>
                    <p>Some of the jury wrote it down ‘important,’ and some ‘unimportant.’ Alice
                        could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; ‘but it
                        doesn’t matter a bit,’ she thought to herself.</p>
                    <p>At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his
                        note-book, cackled out ‘Silence!’ and read out from his book, ‘Rule
                        Forty-two. <span class="emp">ALL PERSONS <span class="cultural">MORE THAN A
                                MILE HIGH</span> TO LEAVE THE COURT</span>.’</p>
                    <p>Everybody looked at Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="emp">I’M</span> not <span class="cultural">a mile</span> high,’
                        said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘You are,’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>‘Nearly <span class="cultural">two miles</span> high,’ added the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,’ said Alice: ‘besides, that’s not a regular
                        rule: you invented it just now.’</p>
                    <p>‘It’s the oldest rule in the book,’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>‘Then it ought to be Number One,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. ‘Consider your
                        verdict,’ he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.</p>
                    <p>‘There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,’ said the White
                        Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; ‘this paper has just been picked
                        up.’</p>
                    <p>‘What’s in it?’ said the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘I haven’t opened it yet,’ said the White Rabbit, ‘but it seems to be a
                        letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.’</p>
                    <p>‘It must have been that,’ said the King, ‘unless it was written to nobody,
                        which isn’t usual, you know.’</p>
                    <p>‘Who is it directed to?’ said one of the jurymen.</p>
                    <p>‘It isn’t directed at all,’ said the White Rabbit; ‘in fact, there’s nothing
                        written on the <span class="emp">OUTSIDE</span>.’ He unfolded the paper as
                        he spoke, and added ‘It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of
                        verses.’</p>
                    <p>‘Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?’ asked another of the jurymen.</p>
                    <p>‘No, they’re not,’ said the White Rabbit, ‘and that’s the queerest thing
                        about it.’ (The jury all looked puzzled.)</p>
                    <p>‘He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,’ said the King. (The jury all
                        brightened up again.)</p>
                    <p>‘Please your Majesty,’ said the Knave, ‘I didn’t write it, and they can’t
                        prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.’</p>
                    <p>‘If you didn’t sign it,’ said the King, ‘that only makes the matter worse.
                        You <span class="emp">MUST</span> have meant some mischief, or else you’d
                        have signed your name like an honest man.’</p>
                    <p>There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really clever
                        thing the King had said that day.</p>
                    <p>‘That <span class="emp">PROVES</span> his guilt,’ said the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘It proves nothing of the sort!’ said Alice. ‘Why, you don’t even know what
                        they’re about!’</p>
                    <p>‘Read them,’ said the King.</p>
                    <p>The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. ‘Where shall I begin, please your
                        Majesty?’ he asked.</p>
                    <p>‘Begin at the beginning,’ the King said gravely, ‘and go on till you come to
                        the end: then stop.’</p>
                    <p>These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">‘They told me you had been to her,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">And mentioned me to him:</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">She gave me a good character,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">But said I could not swim.</span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">He sent them word I had not gone </span>
                            <br /> (<span class="rp">We know it to be true</span>):<br />
                            <span class="rp">If she should push the matter on,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">What would become of you?</span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">I gave her one, they gave him two,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">You gave us three or more;</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">They all returned from him to you,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">Though they were mine before.</span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">If I or she should chance to be</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">Involved in this affair,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">He trusts to you to set them free,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">Exactly as we were.</span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">My notion was that you had been</span>
                            <br /> (<span class="rp">Before she had this fit</span>)<br />
                            <span class="rp">An obstacle that came between Him,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">and ourselves, and it.</span>
                        </p>
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp">Don’t let him know she liked them best,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">For this must ever be</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">A secret, kept from all the rest,</span>
                            <br />
                            <span class="rp">Between yourself and me.’</span>
                        </p>
                    </div>

                    <p>‘That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,’ said the King,
                        rubbing his hands; ‘so now let the jury--’</p>
                    <p>‘If any one of them can explain it,’ said Alice, (she had grown so large in
                        the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of interrupting him,)
                        ‘I’ll give him <span class="cultural">sixpence</span>. <span class="emp"
                            >I</span> don’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it.’</p>
                    <p>The jury all wrote down on their slates, ‘<span class="emp">SHE</span>
                        doesn’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it,’ but none of them
                        attempted to explain the paper.</p>
                    <p>‘If there’s no meaning in it,’ said the King, ‘that saves a world of trouble,
                        you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t know,’ he went on,
                        spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; ‘I
                        seem to see some meaning in them, after all. “--<span class="emp">SAID I
                            COULD NOT SWIM</span>--” you can’t swim, can you?’ he added, turning to
                        the Knave.</p>
                    <p>The Knave shook his head sadly. ‘Do I look like it?’ he said. (Which he
                        certainly did <span class="emp">NOT</span>, being made entirely of
                        cardboard.)</p>
                    <p>‘All right, so far,’ said the King, and he went on muttering over the verses
                        to himself: ‘“<span class="rp">
                            <span class="emp">WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--</span>
                        </span>” that’s the jury, of course--“<span class="rp">
                            <span class="emp">I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--</span>
                        </span>” why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know--’</p>
                    <p>‘But, it goes on “<span class="rp">
                            <span class="emp">THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,</span>
                        </span>”’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Why, there they are!’ said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on
                        the table. ‘Nothing can be clearer than <span class="emp">THAT</span>. Then
                            again--“<span class="emp">BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT</span>--” you never
                        had fits, my dear, I think?’ he said to the Queen.</p>
                    <p>‘Never!’ said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she
                        spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his slate with
                        one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again,
                        using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">Then the words don’t <span class="emp">FIT</span>
                            you</span>,’ said the King, looking round the court with a smile. There
                        was a dead silence.</p>
                    <p>‘It’s a pun!’ the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, ‘Let
                        the jury consider their verdict,’ the King said, for about the twentieth
                        time that day.</p>
                    <p>‘No, no!’ said the Queen. ‘Sentence first--verdict afterwards.’</p>
                    <p>‘Stuff and nonsense!’ said Alice loudly. ‘The idea of having the sentence
                        first!’</p>
                    <p>‘Hold your tongue!’ said the Queen, <span class="cultural">turning
                            purple</span>.</p>
                    <p>‘I won’t!’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Off with her head!’ the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
                        moved.</p>
                    <p>‘Who cares for you?’ said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
                        time.) ‘You’re nothing but a pack of cards!’</p>
                    <p>At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her:
                        she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to
                        beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap
                        of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had
                        fluttered down from the trees upon her face.</p>
                    <p>‘Wake up, Alice dear!’ said her sister; ‘Why, what a long sleep you’ve
                        had!’</p>
                    <p>‘Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!’ said Alice, and she told her sister, as
                        well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that
                        you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister
                        kissed her, and said, ‘It <span class="emp">WAS</span> a curious dream,
                        dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.’ So Alice
                        got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a
                        wonderful dream it had been.</p>
                    <br />
                    <br />
                    <p>But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand,
                        watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful
                        Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her
                        dream:--</p>
                    <p>First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands
                        were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into
                        hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little
                        toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that <span class="emp"
                            >WOULD</span> always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or
                        seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange
                        creatures of her little sister’s dream.</p>
                    <p>The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
                        frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she could
                        hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared
                        their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her
                        unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the
                        Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once more the
                        shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the
                        choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the
                        distant sobs of the miserable Mock Turtle.</p>
                    <p>So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland,
                        though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull
                        reality--the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling
                        to the waving of the reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling
                        sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
                        boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the
                        other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the
                        busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take
                        the place of the Mock Turtle’s heavy sobs.</p>
                    <p>Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in
                        the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through
                        all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how
                        she would gather about her other little children, and make <span class="emp"
                            >THEIR</span> eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps
                        even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with
                        all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
                        remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>　アリスがわけを語る</h3>
                    <p>「ここです！」と声を上げるアリス、とっさのことであたふた、この数分で自分の図体がどれだけでっかく育っていたかどわすれしちゃっててね、あんまりあわてて立ち上がったものだから、スカートのすそがひっかかっちゃって裁判員のいる箱形の<ruby>
                            座席 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ざせき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>が<ruby> 横転 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>おうてん</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、裁判員全員が下でおさばきを聞いているひとたちの頭上にすってんころりん、そのときのみんなは手足をじたばたさせていたので、思わず先週うっかりひっくりかえした金魚ばちのことがものすごく重なってね。</p>
                    <p>「あら、<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ごめん</span>あそばせ！」と口をついて出るもののどうにもあたふた、大急ぎでひろい上げはじめてね、だって金魚でのうっかりがずっと頭にあったから、なんとなくそう思えたんだ、すぐにひろい集めて座席にもどさないと死んじゃうって。</p>
                    <p>「おさばきが進められんな。」と言うキングの声はものものしい、「裁判員みなをおのおのの持ち場にちゃあんともどすまで――<span
                            class="emp.dash">みな</span>をな。」と最後のところを力強くねんおししつつ、アリスをじろり。</p>
                    <p>アリスが座席に目をやると、見えたのは、あわてていたからか、頭から<ruby> 逆 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>さにつきささったトカゲ、このかわいそうなやつは、しおしおとしっぽをふりふり、身動きがまったく取れてなくって。もう１度ぬき出してからちゃんと入れ直す。「さして大した差でもないのに。」とひとりごと。「たぶん<span
                            class="emp.dash">そもそも</span>おさばきの役に立ちようがないし、どっちが上でも。」</p>
                    <p>ひっくり返された<span class="onom"
                            >どきどき</span>からいささか立ち直った裁判員一同、見つかった手持ち黒板とチョークを手元に置いたとたん、せっせと仕事に取りかかってね、みんなしてこの<ruby>
                            事故 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>じこ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>のいきさつを書き出したんだけど、トカゲだけは別、すっかり参ってしまったのか、できることといえば、こしを下ろして口をあんぐり、おさばきの場の天井をぼんやり見上げるばかり。</p>
                    <p>「事と次第について何を知っておる？」とキングからアリスへ。</p>
                    <p>「なんっにも。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「これっ<span class="emp.dash">ぽち</span>もないか？」としつこいキング。</p>
                    <p>「これっぽちも。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「なんとよしありげな。」とキングは裁判員へと顔を向けてね。みんなそのことを黒板に書き出したところへ、白ウサギが口をはさむ。「よし<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >なし</span>、とのつもりでおじゃりましたか。」と言葉こそうやうやしいけど、話すあいだもみけんにしわでしかめっ面。</p>
                    <p>「よし<span class="emp.dash">なし</span>、とのつもりであったぞよ。」とあわてて口にするキング、<span
                            class="onom"
                        >ぼそぼそ</span>と続けるひとりごと、「よしあり――よしなし――よしなし――よしあり……」どっちが聞こえがいいのか品定めしてるみたいに。</p>
                    <p>裁判員には「よしあり」と書きとめた者もあれば「よしなし」とした者もいて。かろうじて黒板をのぞけるところにいたアリスは、これを見て、「どのみち大差なくてよ。」とひとり思う。</p>
                    <p>このときのキング、しばらく<span class="onom"
                            >いそいそ</span>と手元のメモに何かをしたためてたんだけど、いきなり声を出してね、「静まれ！」って、それからそのメモを読み上げたんだ、「決まりその４２。『背たけが１．<span
                            class="cultural">６キロ</span>をこえた者は何ぴともおさばきから<ruby> 退場 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>たいじょう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>とする。』」</p>
                    <p>みんながアリスに目をやる。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">あたくし</span>、１．<span class="cultural"
                        >６キロ</span>もなくってよ。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「ある。」とキング。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="cultural">３キロ</span>近くはある。」と後おしするクイーン。</p>
                    <p>「ふん、出て行かないもん、ぜったい。」とアリス。「それにちゃんとした決まりでなくてよ。たった今でっち上げたんだから。」</p>
                    <p>「ここに記されたものでもいちばん古い決まりじゃ。」とキング。</p>
                    <p>「なら、決まりその１のはずじゃなくって。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>顔を青くしたキングは、あわててメモ帳をとじる。「では、おさばきを話し合え。」と<span class="onom"
                        >ふるふる</span>小声で裁判員に。</p>
                    <p>「まだまだやることがおじゃりまする、キングさま。」と白ウサギはとび上がって大あわて。「このような紙が今しがたとどいておじゃります。」</p>
                    <p>「中には何と？」とクイーン。</p>
                    <p>「まだ開けておじゃりませんが、」と白ウサギ、「おそらくは手紙かと、とがびとの手になる――だれかしらあての。」</p>
                    <p>「そうにちがいなかろう、」とキング、「あて名がないのでないかぎりは。まあまずあるがな、ほれ。」</p>
                    <p>「だれにあてたものなんです？」と裁判員のひとり。</p>
                    <p>「あて先が何もないでおじゃる。」と白ウサギ。「むしろ、<span class="emp.dash"
                        >そとみ</span>には字は何もおじゃりません。」と言いながら紙を広げると言葉をついで、「つまるところ手紙でないでおじゃる、これはひと続きのポエム。」</p>
                    <p>「字の書き方はとがびとのものですか？」と裁判員がもうひとり。</p>
                    <p>「いえ、ちがうでおじゃる、」と白ウサギ、「そこがたいそうけったいで。」（裁判員はみなハテナだらけのお顔。）</p>
                    <p>「だれかしらの字の書き方をまねたにちがいない。」とキング。（裁判員みな顔がまたぱっと明るくなる。）</p>
                    <p>「申し上げます、キングさま、」とジャック、「わたくしめは書いてません、そうだと言い切れるだけのものもないでしょう？　終わりに名前もそえられてないんですから。」</p>
                    <p>「名前がないならば、」とキング、「よけいに事はまずくなるぞよ。<span class="emp.dash"
                        >つまり</span>おぬしはお痛いたをしたことになる。でなければ、いい子としてちゃんと自分の名をそえるはずだからな。」</p>
                    <p>これにはその場一同の手から<span class="onom"
                        >ぱちぱちぱち</span>、キングがこの日初めてほんとにうまいことを言ったもんでね。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">はっきり</span>した、やったのはおまえぞ、もちろん。」とクイーン。「では首をちょ……」</p>
                    <p>「そんなの何もはっきりしてなくってよ！」とアリス。「ふん、何が書かれてあるかもわかってないのに！」</p>
                    <p>「読み上げよ。」とキング。</p>
                    <p>白ウサギはメガネをかけてね。「キングさま、どこからお始めに？」とたずねる。</p>
                    <p>「はじめから始めよ。」とのべるキングはものものしい。「そして続けて、とうとう終わりに来たら、そこでやめよ。」</p>
                    <p>静まりかえるおさばきの場、そのなかで白ウサギが読み上げたのは次のポエム―― </p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p> あいつらの話じゃ　あの女のところで<br /> おれのことを　あの男にしゃべったそうだな<br />
                            あの女はおれを　いいやつと言ったが<br /> おれは泳げないと　言いくさる </p>
                        <p> あの男があいつらに、　おまえはでかけて<br /> ないと伝えたぞ（おれたちにもたしかなことだ）<br />
                            あの女がことを　おし進めたら<br /> おまえはいったい　どうなるやら </p>
                        <p> おれ→あの女は１　やつら→あの男は２<br /> おまえ→おれたちは３　いやもっとだ<br />
                            あいつらみんなもどる　あの男→おれへ<br /> もともとそいつらは　おれのものだったがな </p>
                        <p> まんがいち　おれとあの女が<br /> この<ruby> 件 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>けん</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>に　まきこまれでもしたら<br /> あの男はおまえに　やつらのあつかいをまかす<br /> おれたちのときと　まったく同じだ </p>
                        <p> おれが思うに　それまでおまえは<br /> （あの女が　かっかするまでは）<br /> 出しゃばって　じゃまするつもりだったんだろ<br />
                            あの男と　おれらとそれのあいだを </p>
                        <p> あの男にはもらすなよ　あの女の１番びいきが<br /> あいつらだって　だってそりゃあ<br />
                            ひみつに決まってる　だれにも言うなよ<br /> おまえとおれ　ふたりだけのないしょだ </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>「今まで聞いたなかでも、いちばんのよしありげなわけじゃぞ。」とキングは手をもみもみ、「では今こそ裁判員よ……」</p>
                    <p>「そこのだれかがこのポエムを読みとけたら、」とアリス（このほんの数分でたいへん大きくなっていたので、まったく物おじもせず口をはさんでね）、「<span
                            class="cultural">
                            <ruby> 銀貨 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>ぎんか</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>１まい</span>あげてもよくてよ。こんなのこれっぽちの意味もないと思う<span class="emp.dash"
                            >けれど</span>。」</p>
                    <p>裁判員もみんな手持ちの黒板に書きとめてね、「こんなのこれっぽちの意味もないと思う<span class="emp.dash"
                        >と女</span>。」ところがそのうちのだれもその紙を読みとこうとはしない。</p>
                    <p>「もし意味がないのだとすれば、」とキング、「すさまじく手間がはぶけるぞ、ほれ、何も探らんでよくなるからの。とはいえどうなのかの。」と続けて、ひざ上にそのポエムを広げ、片目でじっと見てみるも、「どうにも何かしらの意味はありそうじゃ、やはり。『……おれは泳げないと言いくさる……』おまえは泳げないのだったな。」と言葉をついで、ジャックに顔を向ける。</p>
                    <p>ジャックは悲しげにかぶりをふって。「見ての通りですよ。」と返事。（たしかにできそうにない、まったくの<ruby> 厚紙 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>あつがみ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>だからね。）</p>
                    <p>「ここまではよろしい。」とキング、そしてひとりごとみたくぶつぶつそのポエムを読んでいく。「『おれたちにもたしかなことだ』――これはもちろん裁判員のことじゃな――『あの女がことをおし進めたら』――これはクイーンのことにちがいない――『おまえはいったいどうなるやら』――おお、まったくだ！――『おれ→あの女は１　やつら→あの男は２』――ほほう、こうしてやつはパイをよろしくしたわけか、ほれ……」</p>
                    <p>「でも続きに『あいつらみんなもどる　あの男→おれへ』って。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「うむ、だからそこにある！」とキングはしたり顔でテーブルのタルトを指さす。「これほど明らかなことはないとも。そののちまた――『あの女が<span
                            class="onom">かっか</span>するまでは』――おまえや、<span class="emp.dash">
                            <span class="onom">かっか</span>
                        </span>したことなどないじゃろ？」と言葉をクイーンへ向ける。</p>
                    <p>「ない！」と言いながらもクイーンはとちくるってインクびんをトカゲに投げつけてね。（とんだ目にあったビルくん、黒板から指で書くのをやめていてね、何も書けないと気づいたからなんだけど、でもこうなってあわててまた取りかかって、顔からしたたるインクを使ってとうとう使い切った。）</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow">まあ『<span class="emp.dash"
                            >かっか</span>』というよりは『へいか』じゃしのう</span>。」とキングはおさばきの場を見回しつつ、にやり。あたりは死んだように<span
                            class="onom">しーん</span>。</p>
                    <p>「だじゃれじゃ！」と続けてキングはむすっとすると、みんな大笑い。</p>
                    <p>「さて裁判員よ、おさばきの話し合いだ。」とキングは言うんだけど、これこの日でもう２０回目くらいにはなるかな。</p>
                    <p>「いいえっ！」とクイーン、「言いわたすのが先――話し合いは後あと！」</p>
                    <p>「がらくたのすっからかん！」とアリスの大声、「言いわたすのが先だなんて！」</p>
                    <p>「だまらっしゃい！」と<span class="cultural">
                            <ruby> 血相 <rp>(</rp>
                                <rt>けっそう</rt>
                                <rp>)</rp>
                            </ruby>を変える</span>クイーン。</p>
                    <p>「だまらない！」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「このむすめの首をちょん切れ！」とクイーンがありったけの裏声をはる。ひとりも動かない。</p>
                    <p>「だれが<span class="emp.dash"
                        >言うこと</span>聞いて？」とアリス（このときまでに元々の背たけになっていてね）。「あんたたちみたいなただのトランプ！」</p>
                    <p>せつな、トランプがいっせいにおどり上がり、空からふりそそいでくる。きゃッと、びくつき半分、むかつき半分で打ちはらおうとしたら、気づけばもとの木かげ、お姉さまにひざまくら、木から頭に<span
                            class="onom">ひらひら</span>落ちかかっていたかれ葉をやさしく取りはらってくれていて。</p>
                    <p>「起きて、アリスちゃん。」とお姉さま、「もう、長々としたお昼ねだこと。」</p>
                    <p>「ねえ、あたくしもう、へんってこなゆめ見てたの！」とアリスはお姉さまに自分がおぼえているかぎりのことを、自分のとっぴなめぐり歩きを、ここまで読んできた通りぜんぶおしゃべり、終わるとお姉さまはキスをしてくれてね、こう言うんだ。「へんてこなゆめ<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >だった</span>のね、ほんと。でもすぐにお茶へかけ足しないと、このままだとちこくよ。」というわけで、アリスは起き上がってかけ足、走りながら心のなかは、そりゃやっぱり、これまでのふしぎなゆめのことでいっぱい。</p>
                    <br />
                    <br />
                    <p>ところがお姉さまは妹がはなれていったあともじっとすわったまま、ほおづえをついて夕ぐれをながめながら、小さなアリスとふしぎめぐりの道行きを考えているうち、今度は自分もうつらうつらゆめを見始めてね、そのゆめっていうのはこう――</p>
                    <p>はじめにゆめ見るのは、その小さなアリスのこと。何度となく小さなお手々をこちらのひざの上でにぎりながら、さらに<span class="onom"
                            >きらきら</span>
                        <span class="onom"
                            >わくわく</span>上目づかいでのぞきこんでくる――聞こえるのはあのいつもの声音、目に入るのは頭をつんと上げるあのけったいなくせ、いつも毛がちらかって<span
                            class="emp.dash"
                        >どうしても</span>目に入ってしまうからってそうやって元にもどそうとするんだ――そしてじっと耳をかたむける、たぶんかたむけるうちに、そのまわりのあちこちが、小さな妹のゆめのなかのとっぴな生き物でにぎやかになってくる。</p>
                    <p>長い草が足下でがさごそ、白ウサギがあわててかけてゆく――<span class="onom"
                            >びくびく</span>ネズミがばしゃばしゃ、そばの池を進んでいて――聞こえてくるティーカップのかちゃかちゃ、ヤヨイウサギとなかまたちは、いっしょにいつまでも終わらないお茶会中、そのあとクイーンが<span
                            class="onom"
                            >きぃきぃ</span>声でかわいそうに来たひとみんなを処すとか言いだして――またもやブタの赤ちゃんが御前さまのおひざでくしゅん、そこへ大皿小皿ががちゃんばりん――ふたたびグリフォンの鳴き声、トカゲの黒板チョークの<span
                            class="onom"
                        >きーきー</span>、さらに取りおさえられたモルモットのもがく声があたりにひびき、そこへかなたからまじり合うあわれなウミガメフーミのさめざめ。</p>
                    <p>だからじっとしたまま、ひとみをとじていると、もう<ruby> 半 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>なか</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ばふしぎの国にいるようで、目をいまひとたび開けてしまえば、つまらない<ruby> 現実 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>うつつ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>にみんな変わってしまうとわかっているのに――草はきっと風で<span class="onom"
                            >かさかさ</span>してるだけで、池がそよぐ草に波を立てているだけで――ティーカップの<span class="onom"
                            >かちゃかちゃ</span>は羊につけられた鈴の音に、クイーンの<span class="onom"
                            >きぃきぃ</span>声も羊かいの男の子のさけび声に――さらに赤ちゃんのくしゃみ、グリフォンの鳴き声、そのほかけったいな物音だってみんな（わかってる）、きっとせわしない<ruby>
                            牧場 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>まきば</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>の<span class="onom">ごちゃごちゃ</span>
                        <span class="onom"
                        >がやがや</span>に――それから、遠くから聞こえる牛のモーモーに、ウミガメフーミのなみだ声も入れ変わってしまうだけなのに。</p>
                    <p>最後にひとり思いえがくのは、この当の小さい妹がこれから先、ひとりの女に育っていくさま。大人にふくらんでいくなかでもずっと、子どものころの、すなおなあたたかい心を持ち続けていくのか。そして、だれかの子どもをそばに集め、たくさんとっぴな話をしては、<span
                            class="emp.dash">その子たち</span>の目を<span class="onom"
                        >きらきら</span>かがやかせるのだろうか。その話は、遠い昔のふしぎの国のゆめそのものだったり？　すなおに悲しむその子たちのそばで、自分もと、すなおにはしゃぐその子たちにかこまれ、楽しかったと気づくのかな、自分の子ども時代の思い出、あの幸せな夏の日々に。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
