<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="alice.css" />
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet" />
        <title>Texts</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="mainNavbar">
            <ul>
                <li><a class="main" href="/">Home</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/about.xhtml">About</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/text.xhtml">Texts</a></li>
                <li><a class="main" href="/conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div id="textNavbar">
            <table class="chapterHeader">
                <tr>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a></td>
                    <td><a href="/text-chapter12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a></td>
                </tr>
            </table>
        </div>
        <h2>Chapter 7</h2>
        <div class="flex-container">
            <div class="flex-container" id="english">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>A Mad Tea-Party</h3>
                    <p>There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the March
                        Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting between
                        them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting
                        their elbows on it, and talking over its head. ‘Very uncomfortable for the
                        Dormouse,’ thought Alice; ‘only, as it’s asleep, I suppose it doesn’t
                        mind.’</p>
                    <p>The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one
                        corner of it: ‘No room! No room!’ they cried out when they saw Alice coming.
                        ‘There’s <span class="emp">PLENTY</span> of room!’ said Alice indignantly,
                        and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.</p>
                    <p>‘Have some wine,’ the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.</p>
                    <p>Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea. ‘I
                        don’t see any wine,’ she remarked.</p>
                    <p>‘There isn’t any,’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,’ said Alice angrily.</p>
                    <p>‘It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,’ said the
                        March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘I didn’t know it was <span class="emp">YOUR</span> table,’ said Alice; ‘it’s
                        laid for a great many more than three.’</p>
                    <p>‘Your hair wants cutting,’ said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice for
                        some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.</p>
                    <p>‘You should learn not to make personal remarks,’ Alice said with some
                        severity; ‘it’s very rude.’</p>
                    <p>The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he <span
                            class="emp">SAID</span> was, ‘Why is a raven like a writing-desk?’</p>
                    <p>‘Come, we shall have some fun now!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they’ve begun
                        asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,’ she added aloud.</p>
                    <p>‘Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?’ said the
                        March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘Exactly so,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Then you should say what you mean,’ the March Hare went on.</p>
                    <p>‘I do,’ Alice hastily replied; ‘at least--at least I mean what I say--that’s
                        the same thing, you know.’</p>
                    <p>‘Not the same thing a bit!’ said the Hatter. ‘You might just as well say that
                        “I see what I eat” is the same thing as “I eat what I see”!’</p>
                    <p>‘You might just as well say,’ added the March Hare, ‘that “I like what I get”
                        is the same thing as “I get what I like”!’</p>
                    <p>‘You might just as well say,’ added the Dormouse, who seemed to be talking in
                        his sleep, ‘that “I breathe when I sleep” is the same thing as “I sleep when
                        I breathe”!’</p>
                    <p>‘It <span class="emp">IS</span> the same thing with you,’ said the Hatter,
                        and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
                        while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
                        writing-desks, which wasn’t much.</p>
                    <p>The Hatter was the first to break the silence. ‘What day of the month is it?’
                        he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was
                        looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his
                        ear.</p>
                    <p>Alice considered a little, and then said ‘The fourth.’</p>
                    <p>‘Two days wrong!’ sighed the Hatter. ‘I told you butter wouldn’t suit the
                        works!’ he added looking angrily at the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘It was the <span class="emp">BEST</span> butter,’ the March Hare meekly
                        replied.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,’ the Hatter grumbled: ‘you
                        shouldn’t have put it in with the <span class="cultural"
                        >bread-knife</span>.’</p>
                    <p>The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it
                        into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing
                        better to say than his first remark, ‘It was the <span class="emp"
                            >BEST</span> butter, you know.’</p>
                    <p>Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. ‘What a funny
                        watch!’ she remarked. ‘It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t tell what
                        o’clock it is!’</p>
                    <p>‘Why should it?’ muttered the Hatter. ‘Does <span class="emp">YOUR</span>
                        watch tell you what year it is?’</p>
                    <p>‘Of course not,’ Alice replied very readily: ‘but that’s because it stays the
                        same year for such a long time together.’</p>
                    <p>‘Which is just the case with <span class="emp">MINE</span>,’ said the
                        Hatter.</p>
                    <p>Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no sort of
                        meaning in it, and yet it was certainly <span class="cultural"
                            >English</span>. ‘I don’t quite understand you,’ she said, as politely
                        as she could.</p>
                    <p>‘The Dormouse is asleep again,’ said the Hatter, and he poured a little hot
                        tea upon its nose.</p>
                    <p>The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its eyes,
                        ‘Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.’</p>
                    <p>‘Have you guessed the riddle yet?’ the Hatter said, turning to Alice
                        again.</p>
                    <p>‘No, I give it up,’ Alice replied: ‘what’s the answer?’</p>
                    <p>‘I haven’t the slightest idea,’ said the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>‘Nor I,’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>Alice sighed wearily. ‘I think you might do something better with the time,’
                        she said, ‘than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.’</p>
                    <p>‘If you knew Time as well as I do,’ said the Hatter, ‘you wouldn’t talk about
                            <span class="pow">wasting <span class="emp">IT</span>. It’s <span
                                class="emp">HIM</span>
                        </span>.’</p>
                    <p>‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Of course you don’t!’ the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously. ‘I
                        dare say you never even <span class="pow">spoke to Time</span>!’</p>
                    <p>‘Perhaps not,’ Alice cautiously replied: ‘but I know I have to <span
                            class="pow">beat time</span> when I learn music.’</p>
                    <p>‘Ah! that accounts for it,’ said the Hatter. ‘He won’t stand <span
                            class="pow">beating</span>. Now, if you only kept on good terms with
                        him, he’d do almost anything you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose
                        it were nine o’clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only
                        have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling!
                        Half-past one, time for dinner!’</p>
                    <p> (‘I only wish it was,’ the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.) </p>
                    <p>‘That would be grand, certainly,’ said Alice thoughtfully: ‘but then--I
                        shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.’</p>
                    <p>‘Not at first, perhaps,’ said the Hatter: ‘but you could keep it to half-past
                        one as long as you liked.’</p>
                    <p>‘Is that the way <span class="emp">YOU</span> manage?’ Alice asked.</p>
                    <p>The Hatter shook his head mournfully. ‘Not I!’ he replied. ‘We quarrelled
                        last March--just before <span class="emp">HE</span> went mad, you know--’
                        (pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) ‘--it was at the great
                        concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>“<span class="rp018"> Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!<br /> How I wonder
                                what you’re at! </span>” </p>
                    </div>

                    <p>You know the song, perhaps?’</p>
                    <p>‘I’ve heard something like it,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘It goes on, you know,’ the Hatter continued, ‘in this way:--</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>
                            <span class="rp019">“ Up above the world you fly,<br /> Like a tea-tray
                                in the sky </span>. Twinkle, twinkle--“’ </p>
                    </div>
                    <p>Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep ‘<span
                            class="rep">Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle</span>--’ and went on so
                        long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.</p>
                    <p>‘Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,’ said the Hatter, ‘when the Queen
                        jumped up and bawled out, “<span class="pow">He’s murdering the time!</span>
                        Off with his head!”’</p>
                    <p>‘How dreadfully savage!’ exclaimed Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘And ever since that,’ the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, ‘he won’t do a
                        thing I ask! It’s always six o’clock now.’</p>
                    <p>A bright idea came into Alice’s head. ‘Is that the reason so many tea-things
                        are put out here?’ she asked.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, that’s it,’ said the Hatter with a sigh: ‘it’s always tea-time, and
                        we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.’</p>
                    <p>‘Then you keep moving round, I suppose?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Exactly so,’ said the Hatter: ‘as the things get used up.’</p>
                    <p>‘But what happens when you come to the beginning again?’ Alice ventured to
                        ask.</p>
                    <p>‘Suppose we change the subject,’ the March Hare interrupted, yawning. ‘I’m
                        getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.’</p>
                    <p>‘I’m afraid I don’t know one,’ said Alice, rather alarmed at the
                        proposal.</p>
                    <p>‘Then the Dormouse shall!’ they both cried. ‘Wake up, Dormouse!’ And they
                        pinched it on both sides at once.</p>
                    <p>The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. ‘I wasn’t asleep,’ he said in a hoarse,
                        feeble voice: ‘I heard every word you fellows were saying.’</p>
                    <p>‘Tell us a story!’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>‘Yes, please do!’ pleaded Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘And be quick about it,’ added the Hatter, ‘or you’ll be asleep again before
                        it’s done.’</p>
                    <p>‘Once upon a time there were three little sisters,’ the Dormouse began in a
                        great hurry; ‘and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived
                        at the bottom of a well--’</p>
                    <p>‘What did they live on?’ said Alice, who always took a great interest in
                        questions of eating and drinking.</p>
                    <p>‘They lived on treacle,’ said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
                        two.</p>
                    <p>‘They couldn’t have done that, you know,’ Alice gently remarked; ‘they’d have
                        been ill.’</p>
                    <p>‘So they were,’ said the Dormouse; ‘<span class="emp">VERY</span> ill.’</p>
                    <p>Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of living
                        would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: ‘But why did
                        they live at the bottom of a well?’</p>
                    <p>‘Take some more tea,’ the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.</p>
                    <p>‘I’ve had nothing yet,’ Alice replied in an offended tone, ‘so I can’t take
                        more.’</p>
                    <p>‘You mean you can’t take <span class="emp">LESS</span>,’ said the Hatter:
                        ‘it’s very easy to take <span class="emp">MORE</span> than nothing.’</p>
                    <p>‘Nobody asked <span class="emp">YOUR</span> opinion,’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Who’s making personal remarks now?’ the Hatter asked triumphantly.</p>
                    <p>Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some
                        tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her
                        question. ‘Why did they live at the bottom of a well?’</p>
                    <p>The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then said, ‘It
                        was a treacle-well.’</p>
                    <p>‘There’s no such thing!’ Alice was beginning very angrily, but the Hatter and
                        the March Hare went ‘Sh! sh!’ and the Dormouse sulkily remarked, ‘If you
                        can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for yourself.’</p>
                    <p>‘No, please go on!’ Alice said very humbly; ‘I won’t interrupt again. I dare
                        say there may be <span class="emp">ONE</span>.’</p>
                    <p>‘One, indeed!’ said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to go on.
                        ‘And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw, you
                        know--’</p>
                    <p>‘What did they draw?’ said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.</p>
                    <p>‘Treacle,’ said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.</p>
                    <p>‘I want a clean cup,’ interrupted the Hatter: ‘let’s all move one place
                        on.’</p>
                    <p>He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare moved
                        into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of
                        the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the
                        change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare
                        had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.</p>
                    <p>Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
                        cautiously: ‘But I don’t understand. Where did they draw the treacle
                        from?’</p>
                    <p>‘<span class="pow">You can draw water out of a water-well,’ said the Hatter;
                            ‘so I should think you could draw treacle out of a
                        treacle-well</span>--eh, stupid?’</p>
                    <p>‘But they were <span class="emp">IN</span> the well,’ Alice said to the
                        Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last remark.</p>
                    <p>‘Of course they were’, said the Dormouse; ‘--<span class="pow">well
                        in</span>.’</p>
                    <p>This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for some
                        time without interrupting it.</p>
                    <p>‘They were learning to draw,’ the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its
                        eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; ‘and they drew all manner of
                        things--everything that begins with an M--’</p>
                    <p>‘Why with an M?’ said Alice.</p>
                    <p>‘Why not?’ said the March Hare.</p>
                    <p>Alice was silent.</p>
                    <p>The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze;
                        but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek,
                        and went on: ‘--that begins with an M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon,
                        and memory, and <span class="ns">muchness</span>--you know you say things
                        are “much of a <span class="ns">muchness</span>”--did you ever see such a
                        thing as a drawing of a <span class="ns">muchness</span>?’</p>
                    <p>‘Really, now you ask me,’ said Alice, very much confused, ‘I don’t
                        think--’</p>
                    <p>‘Then you shouldn’t talk,’ said the Hatter.</p>
                    <p>This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in great
                        disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of
                        the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once
                        or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw
                        them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.</p>
                    <p>‘At any rate I’ll never go <span class="emp">THERE</span> again!’ said Alice
                        as she picked her way through the wood. ‘It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever
                        was at in all my life!’</p>
                    <p>Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading
                        right into it. ‘That’s very curious!’ she thought. ‘But everything’s curious
                        today. I think I may as well go in at once.’ And in she went.</p>
                    <p>Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass
                        table. ‘Now, I’ll manage better this time,’ she said to herself, and began
                        by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the
                        garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece
                        of it in her pocket) till she was about <span class="cultural">a foot</span>
                        high: then she walked down the little passage: and <span class="emp"
                            >THEN</span>--she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among
                        the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="flex-container" id="japanese">
                <div class="textChapter">
                    <h3>おかしなお茶会</h3>
                    <p>なんとひとつのテーブルが家のまん前の木かげにもうけられてあってね、ヤヨイウサギとぼうし屋がそこでお茶のまっ<ruby> 最中 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>さいちゅう</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>。あいだにはヤマネもすわっていて、ぐっすりいねむり。そこでふたりはそいつをクッション代わりにそれぞれひじ置きにしてね、頭ごしにおしゃべり。「ひどく落ち着かなくてよ、ヤマネには。」と思うアリス。「ただぐっすりだから気にならないのかも。」</p>
                    <p>テーブルはでっかいのに、３にんはすみっこにぎゅっとより集まっていてね。「<ruby> 席 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>せき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ならもうないぞ！」と、やってきたアリスを見つけて声を上げて。「<span class="emp.dash"
                        >いっぱい</span>あってよ！」とぷんすかアリス、そうしてテーブルのはしにあった大きなアームチェアにどしん。</p>
                    <p>「ワインでも飲め。」と<ruby> 景気 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>けいき</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>づけにヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>アリスはテーブルをぐるっと見回したけど、そこにあるのはほんのお茶だけ。「どこにワインなんか。」と言い返す。</p>
                    <p>「どこにもねえ。」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「とんだ<ruby> 無礼者 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>ぶれいもの</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ね、ないものをすすめるなんて。」とアリスはごりっぷく。</p>
                    <p>「てめえこそ無礼者だ、さそわれもしねえのに、すわりやがって。」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「まさか３にん<span class="emp.dash"
                        >だけ</span>のテーブルだなんて。」とアリス。「空いてるところもずいぶんあるけれど。」</p>
                    <p>「かみの毛、のびすぎだな。」と言い出すぼうし屋。どうにも気になったのか、しばらくアリスを見つめていたんだけど、ようやく口から出た言葉がそれで。</p>
                    <p>「ひとに口出しするなんてダメなんだから。」とアリスはびしっと言いつけてね、「とってもぶしつけ。」</p>
                    <p>ぼうし屋はこれを耳にして目を丸くしたんだけど、<span class="emp.dash"
                            >口にした</span>のはこれだけ、「カラスとかけて<ruby> 勉強机 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>べんきょうづくえ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>ととく、その心は？」</p>
                    <p>「ふぅん、ちょっと面白そうじゃない！」と思うアリス。「のぞむところよ、なぞかけなら――あれね、もうわかりそう。」と<span class="onom"
                            >わざわざ</span>声に出す。</p>
                    <p>「それはつまり、もう答えがわかるってえことか。」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「その通り。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「じゃあ、わかったってことは言えるんだろうな。」とたたみかけるヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「だから、」とアリスはあわててお返事、「そのうち――そのうち言えるってことはわかったの――同じでしてよ、ほら。」</p>
                    <p>「同じなものか！」とぼうし屋。「ならば、『食べるってことは見える』と『見えるってことは食べる』、これが同じというのかね！」</p>
                    <p>「ほかにも、」と付け加えるヤヨイウサギ、「『ものになるってことは好きだ』と『好きだってことはものになる』、これも同じか！」</p>
                    <p>「まだまだ、」と口をはさむヤマネは、ねごとでも言っているかのようで、「『ねむれるってことは息がある』と『息があるってことはねむれる』、これも同じですか？」</p>
                    <p>「おまえの<span class="emp.dash"
                        >は</span>おんなじだ。」とぼうし屋、ここでおしゃべりはとぎれて、ものどもみんなしばしだんまり、そのあいだにアリスはカラスや机ののことをできるだけ思い出してみたけど、大したこともなくって。</p>
                    <p>そのだんまりをはじめにやぶったのは、ぼうし屋でね。「今日は何日かね。」とアリスの方を向く。ポケットから時計を取り出して、それを<span
                            class="onom">まじまじ</span>、時おりたびたびゆすぶって、耳に当ててみたり。</p>
                    <p>アリスはちょっと考えたあと、「４日。」</p>
                    <p>「２日くるっておる！」とぼうし屋はため息。「言ったろ、時計のからくりにバターは合わんと！」とそのあと、いかりの目を向けられるヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「<span class="emp.dash">最高級</span>のバターだぜ。」と答えるヤヨイウサギはどうにも弱ごし。</p>
                    <p>「ああ、だがパンくずがまじったにちがいない、」とグチるぼうし屋、「またぞろパン切りナイフなんぞ使うからだ。」</p>
                    <p>ヤヨイウサギはその時計を取って、しぶっ面で<span class="onom">まじまじ</span>、そのあとカップのお茶にひたしてまた<span
                            class="onom">まじまじ</span>、ところがさっきの言葉よりいい言葉が思いつかないのか、「<span
                            class="emp.dash">最高級</span>のバターだったのに、ほれ。」</p>
                    <p>アリスはなにやら<span class="onom">わくわく</span>しながら、かたごしに<span class="onom"
                            >まじまじ</span>。「面白い時計だこと！」と口に出してね。「時をつけずに日をつげるなんて！」</p>
                    <p>「何を言うか。」とこぼすぼうし屋。「<span class="emp.dash">きみの</span>時計は年をつげたりせんだろ？」</p>
                    <p>「当たり前。」とアリスはにべもない。「だってそれだと１年間ずっと同じじゃないの。」</p>
                    <p>「それは<span class="emp.dash">こちらの</span>とて同じこと。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>アリスはひどく<span class="onom"
                            >もやもや</span>した気持ちになってね、ぼうし屋の言い分は返事になってないように思えたんだけど、それでもたしかに<span
                            class="cultural"
                        >言葉</span>にはなっていて。「おっしゃること、よくわからないんですけど。」とできるだけていねいに言い返す。</p>
                    <p>「ヤマネがまたいねむりしておる。」と言いながらぼうし屋は、熱めのお茶を相手の鼻にかけてね。</p>
                    <p>ヤマネはしんぼうたまらんと頭をふって目も開けずに、「もちろんもちろんまさにそれを言おうとしていたんです。」</p>
                    <p>「さっきのなぞかけはもうわかったかね？」と言いつつぼうし屋はまたアリスの方を向く。</p>
                    <p>「いいえお手上げ。」というのがアリスのお返事。「答えは何？」</p>
                    <p>「これっぽちもわからん。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>「おれも。」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>アリスはやれやれとため息。「もっとましなことができてよ、」と言うしかない、「そんな答えのないなぞかけで時間をつぶすだなんて。」</p>
                    <p>「わがはいくらい時間どのとお近づきになれば、」とぼうし屋、「<span class="pow">
                            <span class="emp.dash">よびすて</span>でつぶすだなんて言いはせん。<span class="emp.dash"
                                >どの</span>をつけろ。</span>」</p>
                    <p>「あなた何をおっしゃってるやらさっぱり。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「ああそうだろうとも！」と、ぼうし屋はさげすむようにあごを上げてね、「なんならきみは<span class="pow"
                            >時間どのと口をきいたこと</span>もないからな！」</p>
                    <p>「まあね、」とアリスは<span class="onom">おそるおそる</span>お返事、「でもせわしないときには<span class="pow"
                            >時間をさいたりして</span>よ。」</p>
                    <p>「おお！　だからか。」とぼうし屋。「時間どのはさかれるのがおきらいだ。なかよくなりさえすれば、時計のことはだいたいよろしくしてくださる。たとえば朝の９時だとしよう、ちょうどおけいこの始まる時間、ならばきみは時間どのにほんのちょっとささやくだけでいい、<span
                            class="onom">くるくる</span>と時間がまたたくまに回る！　１時半、ごちそうの時間だ！」</p>
                    <p>（「そうなりゃどんなにいいか。」とヤヨイウサギはぼそぼそひとりごと。）</p>
                    <p>「それはそれはけっこうだこと、」とアリスはあいづち、「でもそれじゃあ――おなかが空かないんじゃなくて、ほら。」</p>
                    <p>「はじめのうちは、おそらく。」とぼうし屋。「だが好きなだけ１時半にとどめおくことができる。」</p>
                    <p>「で、そうしてるのね、<span class="emp.dash">あなた</span>は？」とたずねるアリス。</p>
                    <p>ぼうし屋はやるせなく首をふる。「いいや！」との答え。「先の３月にけんかをしてな……<span class="emp.dash"
                        >おまえ</span>がおかしくなる直前のことだ、ほれ……」（とティースプーンでヤヨイウサギを指し示してね）「……あれはハートのクイーンがもよおした大音楽会でのこと。わがはいは歌をうたう役でな。</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>『<span class="onom">てかてか</span>　ひかる<br /> やみの　こうもり』</p>
                    </div>
                    <p>この歌は知ってるかね？」</p>
                    <p>「聞いたことあってよ、なにかそんな歌。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「では引き続き、ほれ、」と続けるぼうし屋、「このように――</p>
                    <div class="song">
                        <p>『<span class="onom">ひらひら</span>　とぶよ<br /> おぼんのように<br />
                            <span class="onom">てかてか</span>……』」</p>
                    </div>
                    <p>ここでヤマネは身を<span class="onom">ふるふる</span>、ねむったままうたいだしてね、「<span class="rep">
                            <span class="onom">てかてか</span>
                            <span class="onom">てかてか</span>
                        </span>……」とあまりに長々続けるので、ふたりがつねってやめさせた。</p>
                    <p>「まあこのふしをうたいきらんうちに、」とぼうし屋、「クイーンさまはどなりなさる、『<span class="pow"
                        >時間のむだっ</span>！　首をちょん切れ！』」</p>
                    <p>「おそるるに足る話ね！」と声をはりあげるアリス。</p>
                    <p>「そうして時間どのをむだ死にさせて以後、」とおくやみとばかりのぼうし屋、「たのみごとを聞いてくれんようになった！　今もずっと６時のままだ。」</p>
                    <p>ぱっとアリスの頭にひらめきが。「そのせいで、こんなにたくさんティーセットが置かれてあるのね？」とたしかめる。</p>
                    <p>「ご名答。」とため息をつくぼうし屋。「いつもお茶の時間なのだ、あいまに洗いものをする時間もない。」</p>
                    <p>「ということは、ぐるりとずれていくってわけ？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「さよう、」とぼうし屋、「<span class="onom">どんどん</span>使ってゆく。」</p>
                    <p>「でも１周しちゃったらいったいどうなるの？」とアリスはふみこんでみる。</p>
                    <p>「話を変えようや。」とわりこむヤヨイウサギ、あくびをしてね。「あきてきた。そこでどうだ、このじょうちゃんにお話をしてもらうってのは。」</p>
                    <p>「め、めっそうもなくてよ。」とアリスはいきなりの申し出にちょっとあたふた。</p>
                    <p>「ならヤマネにさせよう！」とふたりは声をはりあげる。「起きろ、ヤマネ！」そうして両がわからいきなりつねってね。</p>
                    <p>ヤマネはゆっくり目を開いて。「ねてませんよ、」と弱々かすれ声、「みんなの言うことは一言一句聞こえてましたよ。」</p>
                    <p>「話をしろ！」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>「ええ、よろしく！」とおねがいするアリス。</p>
                    <p>「さあさっさとしろ、」とせっつくぼうし屋、「さもないと話が終わるより先にこいつまたねてしまうぞ。」</p>
                    <p>「昔々あるところに３人のかわいい姉妹がおりました。」とヤマネは大あわてではじめてね、「名前はエルシー、レイシー、ティリー。３人は井戸の底に住んでおり……」</p>
                    <p>「食べるものはあって？」とアリスは飲み食いのことにかかってはいつもきょうみしんしん。</p>
                    <p>「シロップを食べています。」とヤマネが言えたのは、ものの数分考えた末。</p>
                    <p>「そんなの無理よ、ほら。」と言うアリスの口ぶりはやさしげ。「病気になってしまってよ。」</p>
                    <p>「だから３人は、」とヤマネ、「<span class="emp.dash">もちろん</span>病気に。」</p>
                    <p>アリスはちょっと思いうかべてみてね、そんなとてつもないくらしを、でもあんまりにももやもやしてきて、そこでこう引き取る、「でも井戸の底に住んでいるのはなぜかしら？」</p>
                    <p>「もう１ぱいどうだ。」とヤヨイウサギがアリスにいう口ぶりはたいへん熱心。</p>
                    <p>「まだ何もいただいてなくてよ。」と気を悪くしたアリスが返す、「だからもう１ぱいだなんて無理。」</p>
                    <p>「では１ぱいも飲めないということか。」とぼうし屋、「ゼロ足す１で１ぱい目だからな。」</p>
                    <p>「あなたは口をはさまないで。」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「ひとに口出ししているのは、きみではないのか！」と問いつめるぼうし屋は得意満面とくいまんめん。</p>
                    <p>アリスは何と言い返してよいのかさっぱりだったので、自分でお茶とパンを取ってから、ヤマネに向き直って、また同じおうかがい。「井戸の底に住んでいるのはなぜかしら？」</p>
                    <p>ヤマネのまたものの数分かけて考えた末に口から出た答えは、「シロップの井戸ですから。」</p>
                    <p>「そんなのありえない！」とぷんすかしだすアリスに、ぼうし屋とヤヨイウサギは「しっ、しーっ。」とやってね、むすっとしながらヤマネはこう言う、「おぎょうぎよくできないのならお話のオチは勝手にすればいいです。」</p>
                    <p>「おねがい、続けて！」ととても素直になるアリス。「もう口をはさんだりしないから。そんなの<span class="emp.dash"
                        >ひとつ</span>くらいはあるかも。」</p>
                    <p>「ひとつも、ですと！」とヤマネはぷんすか。だけど<span class="onom"
                        >しぶしぶ</span>続ける。「なのでその３人の姉妹は――かきわける練習をしていました、ほら……」</p>
                    <p>「かきわけるって何を？」とアリスはさっきの<ruby> 約束 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>やくそく</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>もまったくどこへやら。</p>
                    <p>「シロップです。」と今度のヤマネはちっとも考えずにお答え。</p>
                    <p>「きれいなカップがほしい。」とぼうし屋が口をはさむ。「さあ、みなのもの、席をひとつずらそう。」</p>
                    <p>言いながら席をずらして、それにヤマネも続いてね、ヤヨイウサギはヤマネのいたところに、そしてアリスもしぶしぶヤヨイウサギのすわっていた席へ。席がえで得したのはぼうし屋ただひとり。そしてアリスは前よりかなり悪くなったのだけど、それというのもヤヨイウサギがさっきミルク入れをお皿にひっくり返していたから。</p>
                    <p>アリスはもうヤマネをおこらせたくなかったので、<span class="onom"
                        >おそるおそる</span>切り出した。「でもわからなくてよ。井戸でどうシロップをかきわけるの？」</p>
                    <p>「<span class="pow"
                        >プールでなら水をかきわける。」とぼうし屋。「シロップの井戸ならシロップをかきわける</span>――当たり前だ、バカ者。」</p>
                    <p>「でも<span class="emp.dash">底</span>はせまくってよ。」とヤマネにたずねるアリス、終わりの言葉は聞かんぷり。</p>
                    <p>「もちろんせまい。」とヤマネ。「だから<span class="pow">
                            <span class="onom">そこそこ</span>に</span>。」</p>
                    <p>かわいそうにこのお答えのせいでアリスの頭は<span class="ns"
                        >ハテナ</span>だらけ、なので食い下がらずにしばらくそのままヤマネに話を続けさせてね。</p>

                    <p>「３人はかきわけるおけいこ中、」と続けるヤマネはあくびをして目をこすっていてね、<span class="onom"
                        >どんどん</span>ねむくなっていたんだ、「いろんなものをかきわけます――『お』で始まるあらゆるものをかきわけるのです……」</p>
                    <p>「どうして『お』なの？」とアリス。</p>
                    <p>「いけねえのか？」とヤヨイウサギ。</p>
                    <p>アリスはだんまり。</p>
                    <p>もうこのときヤマネは目をとじてしまっていて、<span class="onom"
                            >うとうと</span>していたのに、ぼうし屋につねられ、ひゃっと小さく声を上げてまた目をぱちくり、そして話の続き。「……『お』で始まるものです。たとえば、おとりとか、お月さまとか、思い出とか、<span
                            class="ns">おっちょこと</span>か――ほら言うでしょ、<span class="ns"
                            >『おっちょこちょい』</span>って――見たことありますか、<span class="ns"
                        >『おっちょこ』</span>をちょいとかきわけた絵というのを。」</p>
                    <p>「そんないきなり聞かれても。」とアリスの頭はハテナだらけ、「ないと……」</p>
                    <p>「ならば口を出すでない。」とぼうし屋。</p>
                    <p>この無礼な物言いにアリスもがまんの<ruby> 限界 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>げんかい</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、<span class="onom"
                            >ほとほと</span>うんざりして席を立ち、歩き出してね。ヤマネはたちまちねむりこんでしまって、ほかのふたりもその子が去ろうともちっとも気にせず、その子は<span
                            class="onom"
                        >ちらちら</span>とふり返って、よび止めてくれるかなとどこかで思ってたんだけどね、最後に目にうつったのはふたりがヤマネをティーポットにおしこもうとしているところ。</p>
                    <p>「もうこんりんざい<span class="emp.dash"
                        >こんなとこ</span>には来なくってよ！」とアリスは森をかきわけつき進んでいってね、「生まれてこのかたこんなバカバカしいお茶会はじめて！」</p>
                    <p>こんなことを言っているうちに、ふと目についた一本の木、そこに何やらなかへと続くドアがついていて。「まあ、へんてこりん！」とアリスは思ってね、「でも今日はみんなへんてこりん。だからいきなり入ってもたぶんまあよろしくてよ。」というわけで、なかへお立ち入り。</p>
                    <p>すると気づけばまたもや大広間、そばには小さなガラスのテーブル。「さあて今度こそうまくやってみせてよ。」とひとりごと、まずはちっちゃな金の<ruby> 鍵
                                <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>かぎ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>を手にとって、庭へ続くドアを開ける。それから手をつけるのが<span class="emp"
                            >キノコ</span>（まだかけらをポケットに残してあったからね）、かじっていって最後は<span class="cultural"
                            >３０センチ</span>くらいの背たけに。そのあと短いろうかをぬけていって、そして<span class="emp.dash"
                            >お次は</span>――気づいたら<span class="onom"
                            >とうとう</span>きらびやかなお庭だ、あたりにはきらめく<ruby> 花園 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>はなぞの</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>、すずしげな<ruby> 泉 <rp>(</rp>
                            <rt>いずみ</rt>
                            <rp>)</rp>
                        </ruby>だ。</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
