<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Alice's Adventures in Wonderland</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="english-text.css"/>
      <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Arima+Madurai:900%7CMontserrat"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="toc">
                    something will need to go here
                </div>
      <div class="textChapter" id="10">
        <h2>The Lobster Quadrille</h2>
        <p>The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes. He
            looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice.
            ‘Same as if he had a bone in his throat,’ said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking
            him and punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with
            tears running down his cheeks, he went on again:--</p>
        <p>‘You may not have lived much under the sea--’ (‘I haven’t,’ said
                Alice)--‘and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--’
                (Alice began to say ‘I once tasted--’ but checked herself hastily, and
                said ‘No, never’) ‘--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
            Lobster Quadrille is!’</p>
        <p>‘No, indeed,’ said Alice. ‘What sort of a dance is it?’</p>
        <p>‘Why,’ said the Gryphon, ‘you first form into a line along the sea-shore--’</p>
        <p>‘Two lines!’ cried the Mock Turtle. ‘Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when you’ve
            cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--’</p>
        <p>‘<span class="emp">THAT</span> generally takes some time,’ interrupted the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘--you advance twice--’</p>
        <p>‘Each with a lobster as a partner!’ cried the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘Of course,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘advance twice, set to partners--’</p>
        <p>‘--change lobsters, and retire in same order,’ continued the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘Then, you know,’ the Mock Turtle went on, ‘you throw the--’</p>
        <p>‘The lobsters!’ shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.</p>
        <p>‘--as far out to sea as you can--’</p>
        <p>‘Swim after them!’ screamed the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘Turn a somersault in the sea!’ cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly about.</p>
        <p>‘Change lobsters again!’ yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.</p>
        <p>‘Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,’ said the Mock Turtle, suddenly
            dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things
            all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.</p>
        <p>‘It must be a very pretty dance,’ said Alice timidly.</p>
        <p>‘Would you like to see a little of it?’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
        <p>‘Very much indeed,’ said Alice.</p>
        <p>‘Come, let’s try the first figure!’ said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. ‘We can do
            without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?’</p>
        <p>‘Oh, <span class="emp">YOU</span> sing,’ said the Gryphon. ‘I’ve forgotten the words.’</p>
        <p>So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then treading on her
            toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the
            Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:--</p>
        <div class="song">
            <p>
                <span class="rp020">
                    ‘“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to
                            a snail.<br/>
                    “There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s
                            treading on my tail.
                </span>
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rp021">
                    See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all
                            advance!<br/>
                    They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and
                            join the dance?
                </span>
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rep">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you,
                        will you</span> join the dance?<br/>
                <span class="rep">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you,
                        won’t yo</span>u join the dance?
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rp022">
                    “You can really have no notion how delightful it
                            will be<br/>
                    When they take us up and throw us, with the
                            lobsters, out to sea!”
                </span>
                <span class="rp021">
                    But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave
                            a look askance--<br/>
                    Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would
                            not join the dance.
                </span>
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rep">Would not, could not, would not, could not,
                        would not</span> join the dance.<br/>
                <span class="rep">Would not, could not, would not, could not,
                        could not</span> join the dance.
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rp023">
                    ‘“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend
                        replied.
                    “There is another shore, you know, upon the other
                        side.
                </span>
                <span class="rp021">
                    The further off from England the nearer is to
                        France--
                    Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join
                        the dance.
                </span>
            </p>
            <p>
                <span class="rep">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you,
                        will you</span> join the dance?<br/>
                <span class="rep">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you,
                        won’t you</span> join the dance?”
            </p>’ </div>
        
        
        <p>‘Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,’ said Alice, feeling very glad that
            it was over at last: ‘and I do so like that curious song about the whiting!’</p>
        <p>‘Oh, as to the whiting,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘they--you’ve seen them, of course?’</p>
        <p>‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘I’ve often seen them at dinn--’ she checked herself hastily.</p>
        <p>‘I don’t know where Dinn may be,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘but if you’ve seen them so
            often, of course you know what they’re like.’</p>
        <p>‘I believe so,’ Alice replied thoughtfully. ‘They have their tails in their mouths--and
            they’re all over crumbs.’</p>
        <p>‘You’re wrong about the crumbs,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘crumbs would all wash off in the
            sea. But they <span class="emp">HAVE</span> their tails in their mouths; and the reason is--’ here the
            Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--‘Tell her about the reason and all that,’ he said
            to the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘The reason is,’ said the Gryphon, ‘that they <span class="emp">WOULD</span> go with the lobsters to
            the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long way. So they got
            their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn’t get them out again. That’s all.’</p>
        <p>‘Thank you,’ said Alice, ‘it’s very interesting. I never knew so much about a whiting
            before.’</p>
        <p>‘I can tell you more than that, if you like,’ said the Gryphon. ‘Do you know why it’s
            called a whiting?’</p>
        <p>‘I never thought about it,’ said Alice. ‘Why?’</p>
        <p>‘<span class="emp">IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES</span>.’ the Gryphon replied
            very solemnly.</p>
        <p>Alice was thoroughly puzzled. ‘Does the boots and shoes!’ she
            repeated in a wondering tone.</p>
        <p>‘Why, what are <span class="emp">YOUR</span> shoes done with?’ said the Gryphon. ‘I mean, what makes
            them so shiny?’</p>
        <p>Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer. ‘They’re done with
            <span class="pow">blacking</span>, I believe.’</p>
        <p>‘Boots and shoes under the sea,’ the Gryphon went on in a deep voice, ‘are done with a
                <span class="pow">whiting</span>. Now you know.’</p>
        <p>‘And what are they made of?’ Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.</p>
        <p>‘Soles and <span class="pow">eels</span>, of course,’ the Gryphon replied rather
            impatiently: ‘any shrimp could have told you that.’</p>
        <p>‘If I’d been the whiting,’ said Alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song,
            ‘I’d have said to the porpoise, “Keep back, please: we don’t want <span class="emp">YOU</span> with
            us!”’</p>
        <p>‘They were obliged to have him with them,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘no wise fish would go
            anywhere without a <span class="pow">porpoise</span>.’</p>
        <p>‘Wouldn’t it really?’ said Alice in a tone of great surprise.</p>
        <p>‘Of course not,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘why, if a fish came to <span class="emp">ME</span>, and told me
            he was going a journey, I should say “<span class="pow">With what
            porpoise?</span>”’</p>
        <p>‘Don’t you mean “purpose”?’ said Alice.</p>
        <p>‘I mean what I say,’ the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And the Gryphon added
            ‘Come, let’s hear some of <span class="emp">YOUR</span> adventures.’</p>
        <p>‘I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,’ said Alice a little
            timidly: ‘but it’s no use going back to yesterday, because I was a different person
            then.’</p>
        <p>‘Explain all that,’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
        <p>‘No, no! The adventures first,’ said the Gryphon in an impatient tone: ‘explanations take
            such a dreadful time.’</p>
        <p>So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White
            Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close
            to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so <span class="emp">VERY</span> wide, but
            she gained courage as she went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to
            the part about her repeating ‘<span class="emp">YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM</span>,’ to the
            Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long
            breath, and said ‘That’s very curious.’</p>
        <p>‘It’s all about as curious as it can be,’ said the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘It all came different!’ the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. ‘I should like to hear
            her try and repeat something now. Tell her to begin.’ He looked at the Gryphon as if he
            thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.</p>
        <p>‘Stand up and repeat “‘<span class="emp">TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD</span>,”’ said the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!’ thought Alice; ‘I might
            as well be at school at once.’ However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head
            was so full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the
            words came very queer indeed:--</p>
        <div class="song">
            <p>
                <span class="rp024">
                    ‘’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him
                            declare,<br/>
                    “You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
                            hair.”
                </span>
                <span class="rp025">
                    
                        As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his
                            nose
                    <br/>
                    Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his
                            toes.’
                </span>
            </p>
            
            <p>
                <span class="rp027">
                    
                        When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a
                            lark,
                    <br/>
                    
                        And will talk in contemptuous tones of the
                            Shark,
                    
                </span>
                <span class="rp028">
                    
                        But, when the tide rises and sharks are
                            around,
                    <br/>
                    
                        His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.
                    
                </span>
            </p>
        </div>
        
        <p>‘That’s different from what I used to say when I was a child,’ said the Gryphon.</p>
        <p>‘Well, I never heard it before,’ said the Mock Turtle; ‘but it sounds uncommon
            nonsense.’</p>
        <p>Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything
            would EVER <span class="emp">happen</span> in a natural way again.</p>
        <p>‘I should like to have it explained,’ said the Mock Turtle.</p>
        <p>‘She can’t explain it,’ said the Gryphon hastily. ‘Go on with the next verse.’</p>
        <p>‘But about his toes?’ the Mock Turtle persisted. ‘How <span class="emp">COULD</span> he turn them out
            with his nose, you know?’</p>
        <p>‘It’s the first position in dancing.’ Alice said; but was dreadfully puzzled by the whole
            thing, and longed to change the subject.</p>
        <p>‘Go on with the next verse,’ the Gryphon repeated impatiently: ‘it begins “I passed by
            his garden.”’</p>
        <p>Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went
            on in a trembling voice:--</p>
        <div class="song">
            <p>
                <span class="rp029">
                    
                        ‘I passed by his garden, and marked, with one
                            eye,
                    <br/>
                    
                        How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a
                            pie--’
                    
                </span>
            </p>
            
            <p>
                <span class="rp030">
                    
                        The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and
                            meat,
                    <br/>
                    
                        While the Owl had the dish as its share of the
                            treat.
                    
                </span>
                <span class="rp031">
                    
                        When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a
                            boon,
                    <br/>
                    
                        Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
                    
                </span>
                While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,<br/>
                And concluded the banquet--
            </p>
        </div>
        
        <p>‘What <span class="emp">IS</span> the use of repeating all that stuff,’ the Mock Turtle interrupted,
            ‘if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the most confusing thing I ever
            heard!’</p>
        <p>‘Yes, I think you’d better leave off,’ said the Gryphon: and Alice was only too glad to
            do so.</p>
        <p>‘Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?’ the Gryphon went on. ‘Or would
            you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?’</p>
        <p>‘Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,’ Alice replied, so eagerly that
            the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, ‘Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her
            “Turtle Soup,” will you, old fellow?’</p>
        <p>The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing
            this:--</p>
        <div class="song">
            <p>
                <span class="rp033">
                    
                        ‘Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
                    <br/>
                    
                        Waiting in a hot tureen!
                    
                </span>
                <span class="rp034">
                    
                        Who for such dainties would not stoop?
                    <br/>
                    
                        Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
                    
                </span>
                Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!<br/>
                Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!<br/>
                Soo--oop of the e--e--evening, Beautiful, beautiful Soup!
            </p>
            <p>
                ‘Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish, Game, or any other dish?<br/>
                Who would not give all else for two Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?<br/>
                Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?<br/>
                Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!<br/>
                Soo--oop of the e--e--evening, Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!’
            </p>
        </div>
        
        <p>‘Chorus again!’ cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when
            a cry of ‘The trial’s beginning!’ was heard in the distance.</p>
        <p>‘Come on!’ cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried off, without
            waiting for the end of the song.</p>
        <p>‘What trial is it?’ Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only answered ‘Come on!’ and
            ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed
            them, the melancholy words:--</p>
        <p> ‘Soo--oop of the e--e--evening, Beautiful, beautiful Soup!’</p>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
